This is a text-only version of the following page on https://raymii.org:
---
Title       : 	That time when one of my HP-UX servers lost half of it's RAM (and how to connect to an HP iLO 2 with modern OpenSSH (7.6+))
Author      : 	Remy van Elst
Date        : 	06-06-2018
URL         : 	https://raymii.org/s/blog/That_time_one_of_my_HP-UX_machines_lost_half_its_ram_openssh_7.3_ilo_2.html
Format      : 	Markdown/HTML
---



![][1]

One of my favorite sayings is: 'Hardware is stupid, move everything to the
cloud!'. The cloud is just someone elses computer, but at least I'm not
responsible for the hardware anymore, since hardware breaks. When a VM breaks,
because you use configuration management and version control, just roll out a
new one. We all know that's not true, but still, the thought of it is nice. A
man can have hopes and dreams, even if the harsh reality shoots them down every
time.

[Last week one of the HP-UX machines had a failing disk][2] and this week it's
back with a whole new issue. After it was rebooted (due to issues with the
services running on it), the Event Monitoring Service (EMS) sent an email
regarding RAM issues and after manual checking it seems the machine lost half of
it's RAM.

It should have 16 GB and now it only has 8 GB. You might imagine my suprise.
This post goes into my troubleshooting, since I was not able to go to the
machine, shut it down and check if the RAM was still there or note part numbers.
I'll cover the use of cstm (Support Tool Manager), how to connect to the HP iLO
(out of band access) with modern OpenSSH (7.2) and the steps I took to gather
information on what might have happened.

<p class="ad"> <b>Recently I removed all Google Ads from this site due to their invasive tracking, as well as Google Analytics. Please, if you found this content useful, consider a small donation using any of the options below. It means the world to me if you  show your appreciation and you'll help pay the server costs:</b><br><br> <a href="https://github.com/sponsors/RaymiiOrg/">GitHub Sponsorship</a><br><br> <a href="https://pcbway.com/g/e7yQRg">PCBWay referral link (You get $5, I get $20 after you've placed an order)</a><br><br> <a href="https://www.digitalocean.com/?refcode=7435ae6b8212">Digital Ocea referral link  ($200 credit for 60 days. Spend $25 after your credit expires and I'll get $25!)</a><br><br> </p>


This machine is not under monitoring yet, therefore it is regularly visited and
checked manually. You could call that monitoring as well, but I rather have
Icinga (or any other tool) doing work for me. An intern doing said things is not
considered a tool, sadly (this is a joke). The machine furthermore is part of an
older setup (10 years) and is being replaced, so there is not a lot of budget or
time allocated. I like to learn new things, so I seize the oppertunity to expand
my UNIX knowledge, thus allocating some of my own time to research (and
hopefully fix) these issues. [Read my other HP-UX articles as well][4] if you
like that kind of stuff.

Now that you know some background, let's dive in.

### DRAM failure on DIMM XX, deallocate rank

It all started with this nice email from the HP-UX system:

    
    
    Onderwerp: hpux09: Event Monitor Notification
    
    >------------ Event Monitoring Service Event Notification ------------<
    
    Notification Time: Fri Jun  1 10:59:36 2018
    
    hpux09 sent Event Monitor notification information:
    
    /system/events/ipmi_fpl/ipmi_fpl is >= 3.
    Its current value is MAJORWARNING(3).
    
    
    Event data from monitor:
    
    Event Time..........: Fri Jun  1 10:59:36 2018
    Severity............: MAJORWARNING
    Monitor.............: fpl_em
    Event #.............: 890
    System..............: hpux09
    
    Summary:
         DRAM failure on DIMM XX, deallocate rank
    
    Description of Error:
    
    SFW has detected that a DRAM is failing on the DIMM specified by the physical location. The rank the failing DIMM is part of will be deallocated.
    
    Probable Cause / Recommended Action:
    
    
    SFW detected a failing DIMM
    Replace the DIMM flagged by SFW
    
    
    Additional Event Data:
         System IP Address...: 198.51.100.30
         Event Id............: 0x5b110af800000000
         Monitor Version.....: A.01.00
         Event Class.........: System
         Client Configuration File...........:
         /var/stm/config/tools/monitor/default_fpl_em.clcfg
         Client Configuration File Version...: A.01.00
              Qualification criteria met.
                   Number of events..: 1
         Associated OS error log entry id(s):
              None
         Additional System Data:
              System Model Number.............: ia64 hp server rx3600
              EMS Version.....................: A.04.20.31.02
              STM Version.....................: D.04.00
              System Serial Number............: DEH48456BK
         Latest information on this event:
              http://docs.hp.com/hpux/content/hardware/ems/fpl_em.htm#890
    
    v-v-v-v-v-v-v-v-v-v-v-v-v    D  E  T  A  I  L  S    v-v-v-v-v-v-v-v-v-v-v-v-v
    
    
    IPMI event hex: 0x7a800fa000e00250 0xffffffff010cff74 Time Stamp: Fri Jun  1 08:44:24 2018 Event keyword: MEM_CHIPSPARE_DEALLOC_RANK Alert level name: Warning Reporting vers: 1 Data field type: Reserved Decoded data field:
    Reporting entity ID: 0 ( Cab 0 Cell 0 CPU 0 ) Reporting entity Full Name: System Firmware IPMI Event ID : 4000 (0xfa0)
    
    
    >---------- End Event Monitoring Service Event Notification ----------<
    

The HP-UX error message is not very helpful, since no actual DIMM location is
given:

    
    
    DRAM failure on DIMM XX, deallocate rank
    SFW has detected that a DRAM is failing on the DIMM specified by the physical location. The rank the failing DIMM is part of will be deallocated.
    

The machine has no DIMM slot XX. The purchase order stated that the machine came
with 16 GB of RAM installed. It now only reported 8 GB of memory.

My first thought was to search the part number and purchase replacement modules
(or search our own stash of "old stuff"), then doing my regular procedure with
RAM issues, only executing the next step if the previous action did not resolve
the issue. I've had my fair share of Dell hardware issues (looking at you,
noncritical raid controller error after upgrading OpenManage...) so my procedure
has proven itself.

  * Apply all available firmware updates for the hardware
  * Do a DIMM swap (slot XX to slot YY) to see if the error is in the slot or in the DIMM
  * Replace the DIMM
  * Replace the motherboard and CPU
  * Contact the manufacturer for warranty

Since this machine is not under a support contract anymore, step 1 and 5 are off
the table. HP requires an active support contract to get firmware updates. I do
not have access to replacement DIMM's and I was not able to go to the machine to
do a DIMM swap (or note part numbers).

The only thing left to do was to dig into the issue and gather as much logging
and information as possible, to prepare for a visit to the machine.

However, first I ended up researching a term unfamiliar to me, Memory Ranks.

### Memory Ranking

I had never heard of the term Rank in RAM context, but [Wikipedia][5] came to
the rescue:

> Sometimes memory modules are designed with two or more independent sets of
DRAM chips connected to the same address and data buses; each such set is called
a rank.

There is even an article on [Memory Ranking][6]:

> A memory rank is a set of DRAM chips connected to the same chip select, which
are therefore accessed simultaneously.

That still didn't tell me much, how correct it might be. [This site][7] had a
very helpfull and practical explanation:

> The term "rank" simply refers to a 64-bit chunk of data. In its simplest form,
a DIMM with DRAM chips on just one side would contain a single 64-bit chunk of
data and would be called a single-rank (1R) module. DIMMs with chips on both
sides often contain at least two 64-bit chunks of data and are referred to as
dual-rank (2R) modules. Some DIMMs can have DRAM chips on both sides but are
configured so that they contain two 64-bit data chunks on each sidefour in
totaland are referred to as quad-rank (4R) modules. Quad-rank DIMMs run at a
maximum PC3-8500 (DDR3-1066) speed in current architecture.

Now that I had a better understanding of what a memory rank is, my suspicion is
that there is one failed memory module and the rest of the modules (after that
failed module) are not loaded anymore.

### Support Tool Manager

Using `cstm` I hope to find the part number of the DIMM's so I can at least
order a few replacement modules. According to multiple [HPe forum][8] [posts][9]
`ctsm` should report the part number with this command:

    
    
    echo "selclass qualifier memory;info;wait;infolog" | /usr/sbin/cstm 
    
    In my case, the output did not contain the part number:
    
    Running Command File (/usr/sbin/stm/ui/config/.stmrc).
    
    -- Information --
    Support Tools Manager
    
    
    Version D.04.00
    
    Product Number B4708AA
    
    (C) Copyright Hewlett Packard Co. 1995-2008
    All Rights Reserved
    
    Use of this program is subject to the licensing restrictions described
    in "Help-->On Version".  HP shall not be liable for any damages resulting
    from misuse or unauthorized use of this program.
    
    cstm>selclass qualifier memory;info;wait;infolog
    -- Updating Map --
    Updating Map...
    -- Converting a (4036) byte raw log file to text. --
    Preparing the Information Tool Log for IPF_MEMORY on path memory File ...
    
    .... hpux09  :  198.51.100.30 .... 
    
    -- Information Tool Log for IPF_MEMORY on path memory --
    
    Log creation time: Fri Jun  1 12:13:01 2018
    
    Hardware path: memory
    
    
    Basic Memory Description 
    
       Module Type: MEMORY
       Page Size: 4096 Bytes
       Total Physical Memory: N/A 
       Total Configured Memory: 8192 MB
       Total Deconfigured Memory: N/A 
    
    Memory Board Inventory 
    
       DIMM Location          Size(MB)     DIMM Location          Size(MB)
       --------------------   --------     --------------------   --------
       Ext 0 DIMM 0A          2048         Ext 0 DIMM 0B          2048    
       Ext 0 DIMM 0C          2048         Ext 0 DIMM 0D          2048    
       Ext 0 DIMM 1A          ----         Ext 0 DIMM 1B          ----    
       Ext 0 DIMM 1C          ----         Ext 0 DIMM 1D          ----    
       Ext 0 DIMM 2A          ----         Ext 0 DIMM 2B          ----    
       Ext 0 DIMM 2C          ----         Ext 0 DIMM 2D          ----    
    
       Ext 0 Total: 8192 (MB)
    
       ===========================================================================
    
       DIMM Location          Size(MB)     DIMM Location          Size(MB)
       --------------------   --------     --------------------   --------
       Ext 1 DIMM 0A          ----         Ext 1 DIMM 0B          ----    
       Ext 1 DIMM 0C          ----         Ext 1 DIMM 0D          ----    
       Ext 1 DIMM 1A          ----         Ext 1 DIMM 1B          ----    
       Ext 1 DIMM 1C          ----         Ext 1 DIMM 1D          ----    
       Ext 1 DIMM 2A          ----         Ext 1 DIMM 2B          ----    
       Ext 1 DIMM 2C          ----         Ext 1 DIMM 2D          ----    
    
       Ext 1 Total: 0 (MB)
    
       ===========================================================================
    
    Memory Error Log Summary 
    
       The memory error log is empty.
    
    Page Deallocation Table (PDT) 
    
       The Page Deallocation Table is empty.
    
       PDT Entries Used: 0
       PDT Entries Free: 100
       PDT Total Size: 100 
    
    -- Information Tool Log for IPF_MEMORY on path memory --
    View   - To View the file.
    Print  - To Print the file.
    SaveAs - To Save the file.
    Enter Done, Help, Print, SaveAs, or View: [Done] #.
    

It did gave me a better idea of the physical memory layout.

According to [this post][9], the output with part number should look like this:

    
    
    DIMM  Location       Size(MB)  State   Serial Num       Part Num
    -------------------- --------  ------- ---------------- ------------------
    Cab 0 Cell 0 DIMM 0A 2048      Config  PRY07064US       A9846-60301
    Cab 0 Cell 0 DIMM 0B 2048      Config  PRY07063JF       A9846-60301
    Cab 0 Cell 0 DIMM 1A 2048      Config  PRY06372A2       A9846-60301
    -------------------- -------- ------- ---------------- ------------------
    

But, as can be seen, no part numbers in my output. I guess it's a version
difference. I found another command to get ALL the hardware in the machine:

    
    
    echo "selall;infolog;wait"|cstm
    

but except for a ton of output, it did not contain any part number. The post did
reference the following:

    
    
    You can get the memory dimm part number from cstm and also from GSP/MP
    
    Run the following command..
    
    GSP>cm
    GSP:CM>df ==> Select A for selecting all and D to dump.
    
    From this out put you would get the exact part number for the dimm and also other HW connected to this box.
    

The `MP` referred here is the "HP Integrated Lights Out Management Processor",
shortly known as the iLO. Dell calls them iDrac (integrated Dell remote access
controller) and on a SuperMicro server it's just called IPMI or OOB (out of band
access). It provides a way to power on/off and troubleshoot the server when you
cannot access it, often also a remote console.

Since I was not able to go to the machine and reboot into some kind of BIOS or
iLO console, I had to resort to connecting via the web or SSH. The web interface
was useless on gathering RAM information, so SSH was my last resort.

### SSH with modern OpenSSH (7.6) to an HP iLO2

With good hope I connected to the iLO IP from my Ubuntu 18.04 box. Only to be
greeted by a happy little error message:

    
    
    $ ssh Admin@192.0.2.30
    Unable to negotiate with 192.0.2.30 port 22: no matching key exchange method found. Their offer: diffie-hellman-group1-sha1
    

Time to configure some old settings. In my `~/.ssh/config` file I started with
the following:

    
    
    Host hpux09-ilo
      HostName 192.0.2.30
      KexAlgorithms diffie-hellman-group1-sha1
    

But of course, just a KeyAlgorithm is not enough:

    
    
    $ ssh Admin@hpux09-ilo
    Unable to negotiate with 192.0.2.30 port 22: no matching cipher found. Their offer: aes128-cbc,3des-cbc
    

Let's add that ciphersuite to my `~/.ssh/config`:

    
    
    Host hpux09-ilo
      HostName 192.0.2.30
      KexAlgorithms diffie-hellman-group1-sha1
      Ciphers aes128-cbc,3des-cbc
    

We know that the setting did something, because now it just fails with no
helpful error:

    
    
    $ ssh Admin@hpux09-ilo
    Received disconnect from 192.0.2.30 port 22:11:  Client Disconnect
    
    Disconnected from 192.0.2.30 port 22
    

Lucky for me, the iLO 2 was horribly old and insecure in 2013 already, as [this
post][10] shows. With OpenSSH 6.2 there were problems connecting to the iLO,
back then. I'm on OpenSSH 7.6 so let's hope that their fix works for me as well.

In a [firmware update for the iLO2][11] some of these bugs are fixed, but not all of them, and quoting [Oscar A. Perez][12] (who lists "Senior Embedded System Engineer, 100% committed to make Embedded Systems reliable, safe and secure" on it's LinkedIn for 15 years, so I guess probably is legit), it will be hard to fix in the future due to the limited iLO 2 memory:

> I had to make lots of changes to the mpSSH server code to get it to work with
the new OpenSSH 6.2p1. I hope this is the last time we have to make changes like
this one. iLO2 memory is very limited and already full so, we won't be able to
spin new firmware releases, every time the OpenSSH folks decide to increase the
size of the payload during Key Exchange.

Lower on in the post I do find the correct OpenSSH options to connect. I missed
the `HostKeyAlgorithms` and the `MACs`. The complete, working configuration in
my `~/.ssh/config` file looks like this:

    
    
    Host hpux09-ilo
      HostName 192.0.2.30
      HostKeyAlgorithms ssh-rsa,ssh-dss
      KexAlgorithms diffie-hellman-group1-sha1
      Ciphers aes128-cbc,3des-cbc
      MACs hmac-md5,hmac-sha1
    

A one-liner with these options:

    
    
    ssh -o HostKeyAlgorithms=ssh-rsa,ssh-dss -o KexAlgorithms=diffie-hellman-group1-sha1 -o Ciphers=aes128-cbc,3des-cbc -o MACs=hmac-md5,hmac-sha1 Admin@hpux09-ilo
    

*Do note that a better solution here is to upgrade the hardware and get it under _a support contract._

### iLO Management Processor hardware information

Logging in gives me a few options to work with:

    
    
    Admin@192.0.2.30's password: 
    
                  Hewlett-Packard Integrity Integrated Lights-Out 2
    
        (c) Copyright Hewlett-Packard Company 1999-2008.  All Rights Reserved.
    
                               MP Host Name: mphpux09
    
                                  Revision F.02.23
    
       MP MAIN MENU:
    
             CO: Console
            VFP: Virtual Front Panel
             CM: Command Menu
          SMCLP: Server Management Command Line Protocol
             CL: Console Log
             SL: Show Event Logs
             HE: Main Help Menu
              X: Exit Connection
    
    [mphpux09] MP> 
    

The forum post stated to go into the Command Menu:

    
    
    [mphpux09] MP> cm
    

(Use Ctrl-B to return to MP main menu.)

Then to enter the following command:

    
    
    [mphpux09] MP:CM> df -nc -a
    

The output contains a long, long list of hardware. You can find it at the bottom
of this article. We are interested in the RAM parts. To my pleasent suprise it
did list the actual RAM in the machine, the 16 GB, including the part numbers.
The Operating system does not see the Ext1 DIMM's, the iLO does:

#### Ext0

The `cstm` output showed me that Ext0 is filled with 4 DIMM's of 2 GB each:

    
    
    Memory Board Inventory 
    
       DIMM Location          Size(MB)     DIMM Location          Size(MB)
       --------------------   --------     --------------------   --------
       Ext 0 DIMM 0A          2048         Ext 0 DIMM 0B          2048    
       Ext 0 DIMM 0C          2048         Ext 0 DIMM 0D          2048    
       Ext 0 DIMM 1A          ----         Ext 0 DIMM 1B          ----    
       Ext 0 DIMM 1C          ----         Ext 0 DIMM 1D          ----    
       Ext 0 DIMM 2A          ----         Ext 0 DIMM 2B          ----    
       Ext 0 DIMM 2C          ----         Ext 0 DIMM 2D          ----    
    
       Ext 0 Total: 8192 (MB)
    

The ILO confirms that:

    
    
    PRODUCT INFO:
    
    FRU Entry #  16 :
    FRU NAME                : MemExt0 DIMM0A
    FRU ID                  : 0128
    JEDEC SPD Rev           : 0x12
    JEDEC Mfg ID            : 0xCE00000000000000
    JEDEC Mfg Location      : 0x01
    JEDEC Mfg Part #        : M3 93T5750CZ3-CD5 
    JEDEC Mfg Revision Code : 0x3343
    JEDEC Mfg Year          : 0x06
    JEDEC Mfg Week          : 0x40
    JEDEC Mfg Serial #      : 0x711D209E
    Mfg Unique Serial #     : 0x00CE010640711D209E
    
    FRU Entry #  17 :
    FRU NAME                : MemExt0 DIMM0B
    FRU ID                  : 0136
    JEDEC SPD Rev           : 0x12
    JEDEC Mfg ID            : 0xCE00000000000000
    JEDEC Mfg Location      : 0x01
    JEDEC Mfg Part #        : M3 93T5750CZ3-CD5 
    JEDEC Mfg Revision Code : 0x3343
    JEDEC Mfg Year          : 0x06
    JEDEC Mfg Week          : 0x40
    JEDEC Mfg Serial #      : 0x711D20AA
    Mfg Unique Serial #     : 0x00CE010640711D20AA
    
    FRU Entry #  18 :
    FRU NAME                : MemExt0 DIMM0C
    FRU ID                  : 0144
    JEDEC SPD Rev           : 0x12
    JEDEC Mfg ID            : 0xCE00000000000000
    JEDEC Mfg Location      : 0x01
    JEDEC Mfg Part #        : M3 93T5750CZ3-CD5 
    JEDEC Mfg Revision Code : 0x3343
    JEDEC Mfg Year          : 0x06
    JEDEC Mfg Week          : 0x40
    JEDEC Mfg Serial #      : 0x711D20A2
    Mfg Unique Serial #     : 0x00CE010640711D20A2
    
    FRU Entry #  19 :
    FRU NAME                : MemExt0 DIMM0D
    FRU ID                  : 0152
    JEDEC SPD Rev           : 0x12
    JEDEC Mfg ID            : 0xCE00000000000000
    JEDEC Mfg Location      : 0x01
    JEDEC Mfg Part #        : M3 93T5750CZ3-CD5 
    JEDEC Mfg Revision Code : 0x3343
    JEDEC Mfg Year          : 0x06
    JEDEC Mfg Week          : 0x40
    JEDEC Mfg Serial #      : 0x711D20A8
    Mfg Unique Serial #     : 0x00CE010640711D20A8
    

I cannot easily find a replacement for this part number, but it comes up in a HP
[forum post][13] as a Samsung 2GB module.

#### Ext1

Ext1 according to the operating system is empty:

    
    
       DIMM Location          Size(MB)     DIMM Location          Size(MB)
       --------------------   --------     --------------------   --------
       Ext 1 DIMM 0A          ----         Ext 1 DIMM 0B          ----    
       Ext 1 DIMM 0C          ----         Ext 1 DIMM 0D          ----    
       Ext 1 DIMM 1A          ----         Ext 1 DIMM 1B          ----    
       Ext 1 DIMM 1C          ----         Ext 1 DIMM 1D          ----    
       Ext 1 DIMM 2A          ----         Ext 1 DIMM 2B          ----    
       Ext 1 DIMM 2C          ----         Ext 1 DIMM 2D          ----    
    
       Ext 1 Total: 0 (MB)
    

The iLO thinks differently:

    
    
    FRU Entry #  20 :
    FRU NAME                : MemExt1 DIMM0A
    FRU ID                  : 0160
    JEDEC SPD Rev           : 0x12
    JEDEC Mfg ID            : 0x2C00000000000000
    JEDEC Mfg Location      : 0x0C
    JEDEC Mfg Part #        : 36HTF25672PY-667D1
    JEDEC Mfg Revision Code : 0x0100
    JEDEC Mfg Year          : 0x08
    JEDEC Mfg Week          : 0x36
    JEDEC Mfg Serial #      : 0xD925C4D3
    Mfg Unique Serial #     : 0x002C0C0836D925C4D3
    
    FRU Entry #  21 :
    FRU NAME                : MemExt1 DIMM0B
    FRU ID                  : 0168
    JEDEC SPD Rev           : 0x12
    JEDEC Mfg ID            : 0x2C00000000000000
    JEDEC Mfg Location      : 0x0C
    JEDEC Mfg Part #        : 36HTF25672PY-667D1
    JEDEC Mfg Revision Code : 0x0100
    JEDEC Mfg Year          : 0x08
    JEDEC Mfg Week          : 0x36
    JEDEC Mfg Serial #      : 0xD72FB723
    Mfg Unique Serial #     : 0x002C0C0836D72FB723
    
    FRU Entry #  22 :
    FRU NAME                : MemExt1 DIMM0C
    FRU ID                  : 0176
    JEDEC SPD Rev           : 0x12
    JEDEC Mfg ID            : 0x2C00000000000000
    JEDEC Mfg Location      : 0x0C
    JEDEC Mfg Part #        : 36HTF25672PY-667D1
    JEDEC Mfg Revision Code : 0x0100
    JEDEC Mfg Year          : 0x08
    JEDEC Mfg Week          : 0x36
    JEDEC Mfg Serial #      : 0xD925C4D9
    Mfg Unique Serial #     : 0x002C0C0836D925C4D9
    
    FRU Entry #  23 :
    FRU NAME                : MemExt1 DIMM0D
    FRU ID                  : 0184
    JEDEC SPD Rev           : 0x12
    JEDEC Mfg ID            : 0x2C00000000000000
    JEDEC Mfg Location      : 0x0C
    JEDEC Mfg Part #        : 36HTF25672PY-667D1
    JEDEC Mfg Revision Code : 0x0100
    JEDEC Mfg Year          : 0x08
    JEDEC Mfg Week          : 0x36
    JEDEC Mfg Serial #      : 0xD925C4CB
    Mfg Unique Serial #     : 0x002C0C0836D925C4CB
    

So the DIMM's are still in the system, and of all places, [Amazon][14] sells
these DIMM's. The type is `2GB DDR2 PC2-5300 667MHz 240pin ECC`, which is
exactly what I need to order a replacement or look into our hardware stash. It
took me a good hour, but the part number and some more type information has been
found.

I still need to figure out which specific DIMM broke, but that is not in the
above output.

### iLO Event Log

In the iLO menu, I also saw `SL: Show Event Logs`. Maybe that will tell me
specifically which DIMM could be the culprit.

    
    
     [mphpux09] MP> sl
    
    
    Event Log Viewer Menu:
    
           Log Name            Entries    % Full      Latest Timestamped Entry
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
       E - System Event           32         4 %      01 Jun 2018 08:47:06
       F - Forward Progress     4000       100 % 
       B - Current Boot          130        43 % 
       P - Previous Boot         130        43 % 
       I - iLO Event             316        63 %      01 Jun 2018 11:14:55
       C - Clear All Logs
       L - Live Events
    

Let's view the `System Event log`, using option `E`:

    
    
    Enter menu item or [Ctrl-B] to Quit: E 
    
    
           Log Name            Entries    % Full      Latest Timestamped Entry
    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
       E - System Event           32         4 %      01 Jun 2018 08:47:06
    
    
    Event Log Navigation Help:
    
       +       View next block     (forward in time,  e.g. from 3 to 4)
       -       View previous block (backward in time, e.g. from 3 to 2)
       <CR>    Continue to the next or previous block
       D       Dump the entire log
       F       First entry
       L       Last entry
       J       Jump to entry number
       H       View mode configuration - Hex
       K       View mode configuration - Keyword
       T       View mode configuration - Text
       A       Alert Level Filter options
       U       Alert Level Unfiltered
       ?       Display this Help menu
       Q       Quit and return to the Event Log Viewer Menu
       Ctrl-B  Exit command, and return to the MP Main Menu
    

Just give me everything, `D` it is:

    
    
    MP:SL (+,-,<CR>,D, F, L, J, H, K, T, A, U, ? for Help, Q or Ctrl-B to Quit) >d
       Confirm? (Y/[N]): y
    
    
    #  Location|Alert| Encoded Field    |  Data Field    |   Keyword / Timestamp
    -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    0     BMC      2  0x205A9918E5020010 FFFF0103FCC00300 TIME_SET
                                                          02 Mar 2018 09:27:01
    1     BMC      2  0x205A991B79020020 FFFF0103FCC00300 TIME_SET
                                                          02 Mar 2018 09:38:01
    2     BMC      2  0x205ABBA1FC020030 FFFF0103FCC00300 TIME_SET
                                                          28 Mar 2018 14:09:00
    3     BMC      2  0x205ABBA490020040 FFFF0103FCC00300 TIME_SET
                                                          28 Mar 2018 14:20:00
    4     BMC      2  0x205B0FEF26020050 FFFF006F04140300 POWER_BUTTON_PRESSED
                                                          31 May 2018 12:48:38
    5     BMC      2  0x205B0FEF28020060 040EA37004120300 CHASSIS_CONTROL_REQUEST
                                                          31 May 2018 12:48:40
    6     HPUX 2   2  0x54801C3002E00070 00000000001A100C HP-UX_OS_NORMAL_SHUTDOWN
                                                          31 May 2018 12:48:54
    7     BMC      2  0x205B0FEF38020090 FFFF006F04140300 POWER_BUTTON_PRESSED
                                                          31 May 2018 12:48:56
    8     BMC      2  0x205B0FEF3B0200A0 040EA37004120300 CHASSIS_CONTROL_REQUEST
                                                          31 May 2018 12:48:59
    9     BMC      2  0x205B0FEF420200B0 FFFF056FFA220300 ACPI_SOFT_OFF
                                                          31 May 2018 12:49:06
    10    BMC      2  0x205B0FEF430200C0 FA00A370FA120300 CHASSIS_CONTROL_REQUEST
                                                          31 May 2018 12:49:07
    11    BMC      2  0x205B0FEF440200D0 FFFF000943090300 POWER_UNIT_DISABLED
                                                          31 May 2018 12:49:08
    12    BMC      2  0x205B0FEF550200E0 FFFF006F04140300 POWER_BUTTON_PRESSED
                                                          31 May 2018 12:49:25
    13    BMC      2  0x205B0FEF560200F0 FFFF027000120300 SOFT_RESET
                                                          31 May 2018 12:49:26
    14    BMC      2  0x205B0FEF56020100 FFFF010943090300 POWER_UNIT_ENABLED
                                                          31 May 2018 12:49:26
    15    BMC      2  0x205B0FEF57020110 FFFF006FFA220300 ACPI_ON
                                                          31 May 2018 12:49:27
    16    BMC      2  0x205B0FEF57020120 0401A37004120300 CHASSIS_CONTROL_REQUEST
                                                          31 May 2018 12:49:27
    17    BMC      2  0x205B0FEF64020130 FFFF027000120300 SOFT_RESET
                                                          31 May 2018 12:49:40
    18    SFW      2  0xC15B0FEF71020140 FFFF000A001D0300 CPU_START_BOOT
                                                          31 May 2018 12:49:53
    19    SFW  0   2  0x5480006300E00150 0000000000000000 BOOT_START
                                                          31 May 2018 12:49:53
    20    SFW  0  *3  0x7A800FA000E00170 FFFFFFFF010CFF74 MEM_CHIPSPARE_DEALLOC_RANK
                                                          31 May 2018 12:50:01
    21    SFW  0  *3  0x7A800FA000E00190 FFFFFFFF010BFF74 MEM_CHIPSPARE_DEALLOC_RANK
                                                          31 May 2018 12:50:01
    22    SFW  0   2  0x40801CBB00E001B0 0000000000000000 BOOT_SWITCH_INSECURE_MODE
                                                          31 May 2018 12:50:24
    23    HPUX 0   2  0x54801C2F00E001D0 0000000000001001 HP-UX_BOOT_COMPLETE
                                                          31 May 2018 12:52:39
    24    HPUX 0   2  0x54801C3000E001F0 00000000001A100C HP-UX_OS_NORMAL_SHUTDOWN
                                                          01 Jun 2018 08:44:01
    25    BMC      2  0x205B110757020210 FFFF027000120300 SOFT_RESET
                                                          01 Jun 2018 08:44:07
    26    SFW      2  0xC15B110760020220 FFFF000A001D0300 CPU_START_BOOT
                                                          01 Jun 2018 08:44:16
    27    SFW  0   2  0x5480006300E00230 0000000000000000 BOOT_START
                                                          01 Jun 2018 08:44:16
    28    SFW  0  *3  0x7A800FA000E00250 FFFFFFFF010CFF74 MEM_CHIPSPARE_DEALLOC_RANK
                                                          01 Jun 2018 08:44:24
    29    SFW  0  *3  0x7A800FA000E00270 FFFFFFFF010BFF74 MEM_CHIPSPARE_DEALLOC_RANK
                                                          01 Jun 2018 08:44:24
    30    SFW  0   2  0x40801CBB00E00290 0000000000000000 BOOT_SWITCH_INSECURE_MODE
                                                          01 Jun 2018 08:44:48
    31    HPUX 0   2  0x54801C2F00E002B0 0000000000001001 HP-UX_BOOT_COMPLETE
                                                          01 Jun 2018 08:47:06
    
       -> This is the last entry in the selected log.
    
    MP:SL (+,-,<CR>,D, F, L, J, H, K, T, A, U, ? for Help, Q or Ctrl-B to Quit) >
    

Filtering out all the logs (reboots were expected), focussing on the DIMM parts:

    
    
    28    SFW  0  *3  0x7A800FA000E00250 FFFFFFFF010CFF74 MEM_CHIPSPARE_DEALLOC_RANK
    29    SFW  0  *3  0x7A800FA000E00270 FFFFFFFF010BFF74 MEM_CHIPSPARE_DEALLOC_RANK
    

Not much help, no clear DIMM location yet. But, I did search around and found
[this HP support page][15] titled "HP Integrity rx3600 Servers - BOOT _DECONFIG_
CPU Can Be Caused by Memory Dimm Failure". In the log output there are these
lines, looking a lot like the above output:

    
    
    SFW  0   0  0x040000E500E00000 FFFFFFFF000AFF74 MEM_SPD_2G_DIMM_FOUND
    SFW  0   0  0x040000E500E00000 FFFFFFFF000BFF74 MEM_SPD_2G_DIMM_FOUND
    SFW  0   0  0x040000E500E00000 FFFFFFFF001AFF74 MEM_SPD_2G_DIMM_FOUND
    SFW  0   0  0x040000E500E00000 FFFFFFFF001BFF74 MEM_SPD_2G_DIMM_FOUND
    SFW  0   0  0x040000E500E00000 FFFFFFFF010AFF74 MEM_SPD_2G_DIMM_FOUND
    SFW  0   0  0x040000E500E00000 FFFFFFFF010BFF74 MEM_SPD_2G_DIMM_FOUND
    SFW  0   0  0x040000E500E00000 FFFFFFFF011AFF74 MEM_SPD_2G_DIMM_FOUND
    SFW  0   0  0x040000E500E00000 FFFFFFFF011BFF74 MEM_SPD_2G_DIMM_FOUND
    

In this part I do see a pattern in the Data Field column, the only thing
changing looks an awfull lot like a memory location:

  * 00 0A
  * 00 0B
  * 00 1A
  * 00 1B
  * 01 0A
  * 01 0B
  * 01 1A
  * 01 AB

Comparing that to the DIMM layout output from earlier:

    
    
      DIMM Location          Size(MB)     DIMM Location          Size(MB)
       --------------------   --------     --------------------   --------
       Ext 0 DIMM 0A          2048         Ext 0 DIMM 0B          2048    
       Ext 0 DIMM 0C          2048         Ext 0 DIMM 0D          2048   
    
       DIMM Location          Size(MB)     DIMM Location          Size(MB)
       --------------------   --------     --------------------   --------
       Ext 1 DIMM 0A          ----         Ext 1 DIMM 0B          ----    
       Ext 1 DIMM 0C          ----         Ext 1 DIMM 0D          ---- 
    

Not exactly the same but good enough, since it's a different server (the above
output seems to be for the 8 port memory carrier board). [This post][16]
confirms my suspicion on the HEX values corresponding to the DIMM Slots.

### HP Integrity rx3600 Server User Service Guide

The [HP Integrity rx3600 Server User Service Guide][17], chapter 5
Troubleshooting, subsection CPU, Memory and SBA, subsection Troubleshooting
rx3600 memory has a picture of the 24 slot memory carrier board:

![][18]

I know this server has 2 24 slot memory carrier boards due to the full output of
the hardware list, it states 4 `12 DIMM Memory Extender` components.

The service guide also lists the error message:

  * IPMI events: Type E0h, 4000d:26d MEM _CHIPSPARE_ DEALLOC_RANK
  * Cause: An SDRAM is failing on the DIMM.
  * Notes: The failing DIMM quad will be deallocated.

Furthermore, the service manual states this:

    
    
    * Troubleshooting rx3600 Memory
    The memory controller logic in the zx2 chip supports three versions of memory expanders. An eight
    DIMM memory carrier provides two memory boards that hold two or four memory DIMMs in both
    memory cells 0 and 1. A 24 DIMM memory carrier provides two 12-DIMM memory boards that
    hold four, eight, or twelve DIMMs in both memory cells 0 and 1.
    All three versions of memory expanders must have their memory DIMMs installed in groups of four,
    known as a quad. DIMM quads of different sizes can be installed in any physical rank on all
    versions of memory expanders, but they must be grouped by their size.
    
    * Memory Subsystem Behaviors
    You must replace DIMMs or memory carriers when a threshold is reached for multiple double-byte
    errors from one or more DIMMs on the same board. When any uncorrectable memory error (more
    than 2 bytes) or when no quad of like memory DIMMs is loaded in rank 0 of side 0, you must
    replace the DIMMs. All other DIMM errors are corrected by zx2 and reported to the Page
    Deallocation Table (PDT) and the diagnostic LED panel.
    
    * Memory DIMM Load Order
    For a minimally loaded server, four equal-size memory DIMMs must be installed in slots 0A, 0B,
    0C, and 0D on the same side of the 24/48 slot memory expander; and in the 0A and 0B slots
    on both 0 and 1 sides of the 8 slot memory expander.
    The first quad of DIMMs are always loaded into rank 0s slots for side 0 then in the rank 0s slots
    for side 1. The next quad of DIMMs are loaded into rank 1s slots for side 0, then for side 1, and
    so on, until all ranks slots for both sides are full.
    Best memory subsystem performance result when both memory sides 0 and 1 have the same number
    of DIMM quads in them.
    

In chapter 6. "Removing and replacing server components", there are 11 pages
(185-196), with picutes and example configurations, on replacing the DIMM's. It
also has Memory loading guidelines:

Use the following rules and guidelines when installing memory:

  * Install DIMMs in pairs in the 8-DIMM memory carrier and in quads in the 24-DIMM memory carrier.
  * Ensure all DIMMs within a pair or quad are identical.
  * Install quads in order of capacity from largest to smallest. For example, install all 2 GB quads before 1 GB or smaller quads, and install all 1 GB quads before 512 MB quads.
  * Side 0 must have equal or greater memory capacity than side 1.
  * Install DIMM pairs or quads based on the following rules: 
    * 1\. Load pairs or quads into the memory carrier in order, starting with slot 0 and ending with slot 2.
    * 2\. Install the first pair or quad in side 0.
    * 3\. Install the second pair or quad in side 1.
    * 4\. For the remaining pairs or quads: 
      * a. If both sides of the memory carrier contain the same capacity of memory, install the next pair or quad in side 0.
      * b. If side 0 contains more memory capacity than side 1, install the next quad in side 1.
      * c. If side 1 is full, install the remaining quads in side 0.

(Nested lists in Markdown are fun)

The guide even has a list of Customer Replacable parts including HP and
replacement part numbers. For my 2GB memory module, it would be `AD328A`, for
sale on [lots of places][19].

### Conclusion

Combining all the knowledge and logging, my best guess is that the following
slots have issues:

  * Side 1 Slot 0B
  * Side 1 Slot 0C

Replacement DIMM's are ordered and on their way, soon to be replaced in the
correct order. Let's hope that the machine get's the other half of it's RAM back
and the problem is fixed.

### Reference, complete output of MP:CM> df -nc -a

    
    
    FRU Entry #   0 : 
    FRU NAME: Core I/O Board ID:0000
    
    CHASSIS INFO:
    
    BOARD INFO:
     Mfg Date/Time      : 7462080
     Manufacturer       : CELESTICA 
     Product Name       : Core IO Board with VGA          
     S/N                : MYL011Y014      
     Part Number        : AB463-60003
     Fru File ID        : 10
     Custom Info        : A       
     Custom Info        : 4848
     Custom Info        : A5
     Custom Info        : 0
    
    PRODUCT INFO:
    
    FRU Entry #   1 :
    FRU NAME: Mem Extender 0 ID:0001
    
    CHASSIS INFO:
    
    BOARD INFO:
     Mfg Date/Time      : 6729120
     Manufacturer       : CELESTICA 
     Product Name       : 12 DIMM Memory Extender         
     S/N                : TH9842X51H      
     Part Number        : AB463-60112
     Fru File ID        : 10
     Custom Info        : A       
     Custom Info        : 4721
     Custom Info        : A2
     Custom Info        : 0
    
    PRODUCT INFO:
    
    FRU Entry #   2 :
    FRU NAME: Mem Extender 1 ID:0002
    
    CHASSIS INFO:
    
    BOARD INFO:
     Mfg Date/Time      : 6729120
     Manufacturer       : CELESTICA 
     Product Name       : 12 DIMM Memory Extender         
     S/N                : TH9842X51J      
     Part Number        : AB463-60112
     Fru File ID        : 10
     Custom Info        : A       
     Custom Info        : 4721
     Custom Info        : A2
     Custom Info        : 0
    
    PRODUCT INFO:
    
    FRU Entry #   3 :
    FRU NAME: Power Supply 0 ID:0003
    
    CHASSIS INFO:
    
    BOARD INFO:
     Mfg Date/Time      : 6662537
     Manufacturer       : C&D       
     Product Name       : BULK POWER SUPPLY               
     S/N                : A804070ET3      
     Part Number        : 0957-2198  
     Fru File ID        : 10
     Custom Info        : 00000000
     Custom Info        : 0804
     Custom Info        : 07
     Custom Info        : 0
    
    PRODUCT INFO:
    
    FRU Entry #   4 :
    FRU NAME: Power Supply 1 ID:0004
    
    CHASSIS INFO:
    
    BOARD INFO:
     Mfg Date/Time      : 6675416
     Manufacturer       : muRata-ps 
     Product Name       : BULK POWER SUPPLY               
     S/N                : A8371000F7      
     Part Number        : 0957-2198  
     Fru File ID        : 10
     Custom Info        : 00000000
     Custom Info        : 0837
     Custom Info        : 10
     Custom Info        : 0
    
    PRODUCT INFO:
    
    FRU Entry #   5 :
    FRU NAME: I/O Assembly ID:0005
    
    CHASSIS INFO:
    
    BOARD INFO:
     Mfg Date/Time      : 6655680
     Manufacturer       : CELESTICA 
     Product Name       : 10 Slot PCI-E 1.1 IOBP          
     S/N                : TH9834955H      
     Part Number        : AB463-60028
     Fru File ID        : 10
     Custom Info        : A       
     Custom Info        : 4832
     Custom Info        : A2
     Custom Info        : 0
    
    PRODUCT INFO:
    
    FRU Entry #   6 :
    FRU NAME: Display Board ID:0006
    
    CHASSIS INFO:
    
    BOARD INFO:
     Mfg Date/Time      : 6703200
     Manufacturer       : CELESTICA 
     Product Name       : DVD/Display Board               
     S/N                : TH983910DA      
     Part Number        : AB463-60020
     Fru File ID        : 10
     Custom Info        : A       
     Custom Info        : 4814
     Custom Info        : A3
     Custom Info        : 0
    
    PRODUCT INFO:
    
    FRU Entry #   7 :
    FRU NAME: Disk Backplane ID:0007
    
    CHASSIS INFO:
    
    BOARD INFO:
     Mfg Date/Time      : 6668640
     Manufacturer       : CELESTICA 
     Product Name       : 8 Disk Drive SAS Backplane      
     S/N                : TH9835V650      
     Part Number        : AB463-60006
     Fru File ID        : 10
     Custom Info        : A       
     Custom Info        : 4814
     Custom Info        : A3
     Custom Info        : 0
    
    PRODUCT INFO:
    
    FRU Entry #   8 :
    FRU NAME: ProcessorCarrier ID:0009
    
    CHASSIS INFO:
     Type:Rack Mount Chassis
     Part Number        :            
     Serial Number      :             
    
    BOARD INFO:
     Mfg Date/Time      : 6732745
     Manufacturer       : JABIL     
     Product Name       : 2 Socket CPU Carrier            
     S/N                : MYJ84203PH      
     Part Number        : AB463-60113
     Fru File ID        : 10
     Custom Info        : C       
     Custom Info        : 4818
     Custom Info        : A3
     Custom Info        : 0
    
    PRODUCT INFO:
     Manufacturer       : hp
     Product Name       : server rx3600                   
     Part/Model         :            
     Version            :       
     S/N                :                     
     Asset Tag          :                                 
     FRU File ID        : 11
     Custom Info        : 411
    
    FRU Entry #   9 :
    FRU NAME: Interconnect Bd ID:0010
    
    CHASSIS INFO:
     Type:Rack Mount Chassis
     Part Number        :            
     Serial Number      :             
    
    BOARD INFO:
     Mfg Date/Time      : 6694560
     Manufacturer       : CELESTICA 
     Product Name       : SAS Interconnect Board          
     S/N                : TH9838Z061      
     Part Number        : AB463-60025
     Fru File ID        : 10
     Custom Info        : A       
     Custom Info        : 4814
     Custom Info        : A2
     Custom Info        : 0
    
    PRODUCT INFO:
     Manufacturer       : hp
     Product Name       : server rx3600
     Part/Model         : AB596A
     Version            :       
     S/N                : DEH48456BK
     Asset Tag          :                                 
     FRU File ID        : 11
     Custom Info        : 411
    
    FRU Entry #  10 :
    FRU NAME: Hot-Plug Board ID:0011
    
    CHASSIS INFO:
    
    BOARD INFO:
     Mfg Date/Time      : 6658560
     Manufacturer       : CELESTICA 
     Product Name       : PCI Hot Plug Control Board      
     S/N                : TH983515H7      
     Part Number        : AB463-60002
     Fru File ID        : 10
     Custom Info        : A       
     Custom Info        : 4711
     Custom Info        : A2
     Custom Info        : 0
    
    PRODUCT INFO:
    
    FRU Entry #  11 :
    FRU NAME: I/O Power Module ID:0015
    
    CHASSIS INFO:
    
    BOARD INFO:
     Mfg Date/Time      : 2105376
     Manufacturer       : C&D       
     Product Name       : PCI POWER BOARD                 
     S/N                : 9080708250F8    
     Part Number        : 0950-4677  
     Fru File ID        : 10
     Custom Info        : X1      
     Custom Info        : 0825
     Custom Info        : A1
     Custom Info        : 0
    
    PRODUCT INFO:
    
    FRU Entry #  12 :
    FRU NAME: Processor 0 ID:0032
    
    PROCESSOR DATA 
     S-spec/QDF:  LAB5
     Sample/Prod: 01
    
    CORE DATA 
     Arch Revision                :  00
     Core Family                  :  20
     Core Model                   :  01
     Core Stepping                :  01
     Max Core Frequency           : 1666 MHZ
     Max SysBus Frequency         :  333 MHZ
     Core Voltage                 : 1150 mV
     Core Voltage Tolerance,High  :   64 mV
     Core Voltage Tolerance,Low   :   3F mV
    
    CACHE DATA 
     Cache Size                   :   18 MB
    
    PACKAGE DATA 
     Package Revision             : NE Substrate Revision: 01
    
    PROC PART NUMBER DATA 
     Part Number                  : 80567KF
     Electronic Signature         : 0003AB71B8C89784
    
    THERMAL REF DATA 
     Upper Temp Ref               :  92 C
     Calibr Offset                :  18 C
    
    FEATURES DATA 
     IA-32 Proc Core Feature Flags:  FFFB8743
     IA-64 Proc Core Feature Flags:  1B81806300000000
     Package Feature Flags        :  3F010000
     Devices on TAP Chain         :  2
    
    FRU Entry #  13 :
    FRU NAME: Processor 1 ID:0033
    
    PROCESSOR DATA 
     S-spec/QDF:  LAB5
     Sample/Prod: 01
    
    CORE DATA 
     Arch Revision                :  00
     Core Family                  :  20
     Core Model                   :  01
     Core Stepping                :  01
     Max Core Frequency           : 1666 MHZ
     Max SysBus Frequency         :  333 MHZ
     Core Voltage                 : 1150 mV
     Core Voltage Tolerance,High  :   64 mV
     Core Voltage Tolerance,Low   :   3F mV
    
    CACHE DATA 
     Cache Size                   :   18 MB
    
    PACKAGE DATA 
     Package Revision             : NE Substrate Revision: 01
    
    PROC PART NUMBER DATA 
     Part Number                  : 80567KF
     Electronic Signature         : 0001E4BA8B93CDD5
    
    THERMAL REF DATA 
     Upper Temp Ref               :  92 C
     Calibr Offset                :  17 C
    
    FEATURES DATA 
     IA-32 Proc Core Feature Flags:  FFFB8743
     IA-64 Proc Core Feature Flags:  1B81806300000000
     Package Feature Flags        :  3F010000
     Devices on TAP Chain         :  2
    
    FRU Entry #  14 :
    FRU NAME: Processor 0 RAM ID:0036
    
    CHASSIS INFO:
    
    BOARD INFO:
     Mfg Date/Time      : 0
     Manufacturer       : 
     Product Name       : MTV_A1_1618     
     S/N                : PR1084441T  
     Part Number        : AD391-2100C
     Fru File ID        : B
     Custom Info        : 
     Custom Info        : 4733
     Custom Info        :   
     Custom Info        : 2H64014D2b82    
     Custom Info        : 1
    
    PRODUCT INFO:
    
    FRU Entry #  15 :
    FRU NAME: Processor 1 RAM ID:0037
    
    CHASSIS INFO:
    
    BOARD INFO:
     Mfg Date/Time      : 0
     Manufacturer       : 
     Product Name       : MTV_A1_1618     
     S/N                : PR108443XV  
     Part Number        : AD391-2100C
     Fru File ID        : B
     Custom Info        : 
     Custom Info        : 4733
     Custom Info        :   
     Custom Info        : 2H64014D2b82    
     Custom Info        : 1
    
    PRODUCT INFO:
    
    FRU Entry #  16 :
    FRU NAME                : MemExt0 DIMM0A
    FRU ID                  : 0128
    JEDEC SPD Rev           : 0x12
    JEDEC Mfg ID            : 0xCE00000000000000
    JEDEC Mfg Location      : 0x01
    JEDEC Mfg Part #        : M3 93T5750CZ3-CD5 
    JEDEC Mfg Revision Code : 0x3343
    JEDEC Mfg Year          : 0x06
    JEDEC Mfg Week          : 0x40
    JEDEC Mfg Serial #      : 0x711D209E
    Mfg Unique Serial #     : 0x00CE010640711D209E
    
    FRU Entry #  17 :
    FRU NAME                : MemExt0 DIMM0B
    FRU ID                  : 0136
    JEDEC SPD Rev           : 0x12
    JEDEC Mfg ID            : 0xCE00000000000000
    JEDEC Mfg Location      : 0x01
    JEDEC Mfg Part #        : M3 93T5750CZ3-CD5 
    JEDEC Mfg Revision Code : 0x3343
    JEDEC Mfg Year          : 0x06
    JEDEC Mfg Week          : 0x40
    JEDEC Mfg Serial #      : 0x711D20AA
    Mfg Unique Serial #     : 0x00CE010640711D20AA
    
    FRU Entry #  18 :
    FRU NAME                : MemExt0 DIMM0C
    FRU ID                  : 0144
    JEDEC SPD Rev           : 0x12
    JEDEC Mfg ID            : 0xCE00000000000000
    JEDEC Mfg Location      : 0x01
    JEDEC Mfg Part #        : M3 93T5750CZ3-CD5 
    JEDEC Mfg Revision Code : 0x3343
    JEDEC Mfg Year          : 0x06
    JEDEC Mfg Week          : 0x40
    JEDEC Mfg Serial #      : 0x711D20A2
    Mfg Unique Serial #     : 0x00CE010640711D20A2
    
    FRU Entry #  19 :
    FRU NAME                : MemExt0 DIMM0D
    FRU ID                  : 0152
    JEDEC SPD Rev           : 0x12
    JEDEC Mfg ID            : 0xCE00000000000000
    JEDEC Mfg Location      : 0x01
    JEDEC Mfg Part #        : M3 93T5750CZ3-CD5 
    JEDEC Mfg Revision Code : 0x3343
    JEDEC Mfg Year          : 0x06
    JEDEC Mfg Week          : 0x40
    JEDEC Mfg Serial #      : 0x711D20A8
    Mfg Unique Serial #     : 0x00CE010640711D20A8
    
    FRU Entry #  20 :
    FRU NAME                : MemExt1 DIMM0A
    FRU ID                  : 0160
    JEDEC SPD Rev           : 0x12
    JEDEC Mfg ID            : 0x2C00000000000000
    JEDEC Mfg Location      : 0x0C
    JEDEC Mfg Part #        : 36HTF25672PY-667D1
    JEDEC Mfg Revision Code : 0x0100
    JEDEC Mfg Year          : 0x08
    JEDEC Mfg Week          : 0x36
    JEDEC Mfg Serial #      : 0xD925C4D3
    Mfg Unique Serial #     : 0x002C0C0836D925C4D3
    
    FRU Entry #  21 :
    FRU NAME                : MemExt1 DIMM0B
    FRU ID                  : 0168
    JEDEC SPD Rev           : 0x12
    JEDEC Mfg ID            : 0x2C00000000000000
    JEDEC Mfg Location      : 0x0C
    JEDEC Mfg Part #        : 36HTF25672PY-667D1
    JEDEC Mfg Revision Code : 0x0100
    JEDEC Mfg Year          : 0x08
    JEDEC Mfg Week          : 0x36
    JEDEC Mfg Serial #      : 0xD72FB723
    Mfg Unique Serial #     : 0x002C0C0836D72FB723
    
    FRU Entry #  22 :
    FRU NAME                : MemExt1 DIMM0C
    FRU ID                  : 0176
    JEDEC SPD Rev           : 0x12
    JEDEC Mfg ID            : 0x2C00000000000000
    JEDEC Mfg Location      : 0x0C
    JEDEC Mfg Part #        : 36HTF25672PY-667D1
    JEDEC Mfg Revision Code : 0x0100
    JEDEC Mfg Year          : 0x08
    JEDEC Mfg Week          : 0x36
    JEDEC Mfg Serial #      : 0xD925C4D9
    Mfg Unique Serial #     : 0x002C0C0836D925C4D9
    
    FRU Entry #  23 :
    FRU NAME                : MemExt1 DIMM0D
    FRU ID                  : 0184
    JEDEC SPD Rev           : 0x12
    JEDEC Mfg ID            : 0x2C00000000000000
    JEDEC Mfg Location      : 0x0C
    JEDEC Mfg Part #        : 36HTF25672PY-667D1
    JEDEC Mfg Revision Code : 0x0100
    JEDEC Mfg Year          : 0x08
    JEDEC Mfg Week          : 0x36
    JEDEC Mfg Serial #      : 0xD925C4CB
    Mfg Unique Serial #     : 0x002C0C0836D925C4CB
    
       -> This is the last entry in the selected list.
    
    -> Command successful.
    
    
    
    [mphpux09] MP:CM> sysrev
    
    
    SYSREV
    
    Current firmware revisions
    
     MP FW     : F.02.23
     BMC FW    : 05.25
     EFI FW    : ROM A 07.12, ROM B 07.12
     System FW : ROM A 04.03, ROM B 04.03, Boot ROM A
     PDH FW    : 50.07
     DHPC FW   : 01.23
     UCIO FW   : 03.0b
     PRS FW    : 00.08 UpSeqRev: 0c, DownSeqRev: 08
     HFC FW    : 00.04 SetRev: 00
    

   [1]: https://raymii.org/s/inc/img/nocloud.png
   [2]: https://raymii.org/s/tutorials/Find_part_number_of_failed_disk_on_HP-UX_with_sasmgr.html
   [3]: https://www.digitalocean.com/?refcode=7435ae6b8212
   [4]: https://raymii.org/s/tags/hp-ux.html
   [5]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DIMM#Ranking
   [6]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memory_rank
   [7]: https://web.archive.org/web/20180605191021/http://www.dataram.com/blog/?p=32
   [8]: https://web.archive.org/web/20180605193125/https://community.hpe.com/t5/General/How-to-find-Memory-DIMM-part-number/td-p/5265571
   [9]: https://web.archive.org/web/20180605193526/https://community.hpe.com/t5/HPE-9000-and-HPE-e3000-Servers/checking-part-number-of-memory/m-p/4501569/highlight/true
   [10]: https://web.archive.org/web/20180605195032/https://community.hpe.com/t5/Server-Management-Remote-Server/Unable-to-SSH-to-iLO2-with-OpenSSH-6-2/td-p/6050925
   [11]: http://web.archive.org/web/20180601112113/https://community.hpe.com/t5/Server-Management-Remote-Server/iLO-2-Firmware-version-2-20-released/td-p/6067313
   [12]: https://www.linkedin.com/in/oscar-perez-7a861549
   [13]: https://web.archive.org/web/20180605200950/https://community.hpe.com/t5/Integrity-Servers/Hardware-Information-finding-How-in-HP-UX-Server/m-p/6697829/highlight/true
   [14]: https://web.archive.org/web/20180605200737/https://www.amazon.com/PC2-5300-667MHz-240pin-Registered-MT36HTF25672PY-667D1/dp/B0050JMQFS
   [15]: https://web.archive.org/web/20180605204015/https://support.hpe.com/hpsc/doc/public/display?docId=c02454812
   [16]: https://web.archive.org/web/20180605202816/https://community.hpe.com/t5/Integrity-Servers/RX2620-Memory-Errors/m-p/4794083/highlight/true#M7674
   [17]: https://raymii.org/s/inc/downloads/emr_na-c01290179-9.pdf
   [18]: https://raymii.org/s/inc/img/rx3600-mem.png
   [19]: https://web.archive.org/web/20180605205753/http://www.memory4less.com/hp-2gb-ddr2-pc4200-ad328a

---

License:
All the text on this website is free as in freedom unless stated otherwise. 
This means you can use it in any way you want, you can copy it, change it 
the way you like and republish it, as long as you release the (modified) 
content under the same license to give others the same freedoms you've got 
and place my name and a link to this site with the article as source.

This site uses Google Analytics for statistics and Google Adwords for 
advertisements. You are tracked and Google knows everything about you. 
Use an adblocker like ublock-origin if you don't want it.

All the code on this website is licensed under the GNU GPL v3 license 
unless already licensed under a license which does not allows this form 
of licensing or if another license is stated on that page / in that software:

    This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
    it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
    the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
    (at your option) any later version.

    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
    GNU General Public License for more details.

    You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
    along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

Just to be clear, the information on this website is for meant for educational 
purposes and you use it at your own risk. I do not take responsibility if you 
screw something up. Use common sense, do not 'rm -rf /' as root for example. 
If you have any questions then do not hesitate to contact me.

See https://raymii.org/s/static/About.html for details.