https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.txt
https://www.gnu.org/licenses/agpl-3.0.txt

diff --side-by-side agpl-3.0.txt gpl-3.0.txt 



                    GNU AFFERO GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE	      |	                    GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
                       Version 3, 19 November 2007	      |	                       Version 3, 29 June 2007

 Copyright (C) 2007 Free Software Foundation, Inc. <https://f	 Copyright (C) 2007 Free Software Foundation, Inc. <https://f
 Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies	 Everyone is permitted to copy and distribute verbatim copies
 of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.	 of this license document, but changing it is not allowed.

                            Preamble				                            Preamble

  The GNU Affero General Public License is a free, copyleft l |	  The GNU General Public License is a free, copyleft license 
software and other kinds of works, specifically designed to e |	software and other kinds of works.
cooperation with the community in the case of network server  <

  The licenses for most software and other practical works ar	  The licenses for most software and other practical works ar
to take away your freedom to share and change the works.  By 	to take away your freedom to share and change the works.  By 
our General Public Licenses are intended to guarantee your fr |	the GNU General Public License is intended to guarantee your 
share and change all versions of a program--to make sure it r	share and change all versions of a program--to make sure it r
software for all its users.				      |	software for all its users.  We, the Free Software Foundation
							      >	GNU General Public License for most of our software; it appli
							      >	any other work released this way by its authors.  You can app
							      >	your programs, too.

  When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom	  When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom
price.  Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure	price.  Our General Public Licenses are designed to make sure
have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and c	have the freedom to distribute copies of free software (and c
them if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it	them if you wish), that you receive source code or can get it
want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it	want it, that you can change the software or use pieces of it
free programs, and that you know you can do these things.	free programs, and that you know you can do these things.

  Developers that use our General Public Licenses protect you |	  To protect your rights, we need to prevent others from deny
with two steps: (1) assert copyright on the software, and (2) |	these rights or asking you to surrender the rights.  Therefor
you this License which gives you legal permission to copy, di |	certain responsibilities if you distribute copies of the soft
and/or modify the software.				      |	you modify it: responsibilities to respect the freedom of oth
							      |
  A secondary benefit of defending all users' freedom is that |	  For example, if you distribute copies of such a program, wh
improvements made in alternate versions of the program, if th |	gratis or for a fee, you must pass on to the recipients the s
receive widespread use, become available for other developers |	freedoms that you received.  You must make sure that they, to
incorporate.  Many developers of free software are heartened  |	or can get the source code.  And you must show them these ter
encouraged by the resulting cooperation.  However, in the cas |	know their rights.
software used on network servers, this result may fail to com |
The GNU General Public License permits making a modified vers |	  Developers that use the GNU GPL protect your rights with tw
letting the public access it on a server without ever releasi |	(1) assert copyright on the software, and (2) offer you this 
source code to the public.				      |	giving you legal permission to copy, distribute and/or modify
							      |
  The GNU Affero General Public License is designed specifica |	  For the developers' and authors' protection, the GPL clearl
ensure that, in such cases, the modified source code becomes  |	that there is no warranty for this free software.  For both u
to the community.  It requires the operator of a network serv |	authors' sake, the GPL requires that modified versions be mar
provide the source code of the modified version running there |	changed, so that their problems will not be attributed errone
users of that server.  Therefore, public use of a modified ve |	authors of previous versions.
a publicly accessible server, gives the public access to the  |
code of the modified version.				      |	  Some devices are designed to deny users access to install o
							      |	modified versions of the software inside them, although the m
  An older license, called the Affero General Public License  |	can do so.  This is fundamentally incompatible with the aim o
published by Affero, was designed to accomplish similar goals |	protecting users' freedom to change the software.  The system
a different license, not a version of the Affero GPL, but Aff |	pattern of such abuse occurs in the area of products for indi
released a new version of the Affero GPL which permits relice |	use, which is precisely where it is most unacceptable.  There
this license.						      |	have designed this version of the GPL to prohibit the practic
							      >	products.  If such problems arise substantially in other doma
							      >	stand ready to extend this provision to those domains in futu
							      >	of the GPL, as needed to protect the freedom of users.
							      >
							      >	  Finally, every program is threatened constantly by software
							      >	States should not allow patents to restrict development and u
							      >	software on general-purpose computers, but in those that do, 
							      >	avoid the special danger that patents applied to a free progr
							      >	make it effectively proprietary.  To prevent this, the GPL as
							      >	patents cannot be used to render the program non-free.

  The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution 	  The precise terms and conditions for copying, distribution 
modification follow.						modification follow.

                       TERMS AND CONDITIONS			                       TERMS AND CONDITIONS

  0. Definitions.						  0. Definitions.

  "This License" refers to version 3 of the GNU Affero Genera |	  "This License" refers to version 3 of the GNU General Publi

  "Copyright" also means copyright-like laws that apply to ot	  "Copyright" also means copyright-like laws that apply to ot
works, such as semiconductor masks.				works, such as semiconductor masks.

  "The Program" refers to any copyrightable work licensed und	  "The Program" refers to any copyrightable work licensed und
License.  Each licensee is addressed as "you".  "Licensees" a	License.  Each licensee is addressed as "you".  "Licensees" a
"recipients" may be individuals or organizations.		"recipients" may be individuals or organizations.

  To "modify" a work means to copy from or adapt all or part 	  To "modify" a work means to copy from or adapt all or part 
in a fashion requiring copyright permission, other than the m	in a fashion requiring copyright permission, other than the m
exact copy.  The resulting work is called a "modified version	exact copy.  The resulting work is called a "modified version
earlier work or a work "based on" the earlier work.		earlier work or a work "based on" the earlier work.

  A "covered work" means either the unmodified Program or a w	  A "covered work" means either the unmodified Program or a w
on the Program.							on the Program.

  To "propagate" a work means to do anything with it that, wi	  To "propagate" a work means to do anything with it that, wi
permission, would make you directly or secondarily liable for	permission, would make you directly or secondarily liable for
infringement under applicable copyright law, except executing	infringement under applicable copyright law, except executing
computer or modifying a private copy.  Propagation includes c	computer or modifying a private copy.  Propagation includes c
distribution (with or without modification), making available	distribution (with or without modification), making available
public, and in some countries other activities as well.		public, and in some countries other activities as well.

  To "convey" a work means any kind of propagation that enabl	  To "convey" a work means any kind of propagation that enabl
parties to make or receive copies.  Mere interaction with a u	parties to make or receive copies.  Mere interaction with a u
a computer network, with no transfer of a copy, is not convey	a computer network, with no transfer of a copy, is not convey

  An interactive user interface displays "Appropriate Legal N	  An interactive user interface displays "Appropriate Legal N
to the extent that it includes a convenient and prominently v	to the extent that it includes a convenient and prominently v
feature that (1) displays an appropriate copyright notice, an	feature that (1) displays an appropriate copyright notice, an
tells the user that there is no warranty for the work (except	tells the user that there is no warranty for the work (except
extent that warranties are provided), that licensees may conv	extent that warranties are provided), that licensees may conv
work under this License, and how to view a copy of this Licen	work under this License, and how to view a copy of this Licen
the interface presents a list of user commands or options, su	the interface presents a list of user commands or options, su
menu, a prominent item in the list meets this criterion.	menu, a prominent item in the list meets this criterion.

  1. Source Code.						  1. Source Code.

  The "source code" for a work means the preferred form of th	  The "source code" for a work means the preferred form of th
for making modifications to it.  "Object code" means any non-	for making modifications to it.  "Object code" means any non-
form of a work.							form of a work.

  A "Standard Interface" means an interface that either is an	  A "Standard Interface" means an interface that either is an
standard defined by a recognized standards body, or, in the c	standard defined by a recognized standards body, or, in the c
interfaces specified for a particular programming language, o	interfaces specified for a particular programming language, o
is widely used among developers working in that language.	is widely used among developers working in that language.

  The "System Libraries" of an executable work include anythi	  The "System Libraries" of an executable work include anythi
than the work as a whole, that (a) is included in the normal 	than the work as a whole, that (a) is included in the normal 
packaging a Major Component, but which is not part of that Ma	packaging a Major Component, but which is not part of that Ma
Component, and (b) serves only to enable use of the work with	Component, and (b) serves only to enable use of the work with
Major Component, or to implement a Standard Interface for whi	Major Component, or to implement a Standard Interface for whi
implementation is available to the public in source code form	implementation is available to the public in source code form
"Major Component", in this context, means a major essential c	"Major Component", in this context, means a major essential c
(kernel, window system, and so on) of the specific operating 	(kernel, window system, and so on) of the specific operating 
(if any) on which the executable work runs, or a compiler use	(if any) on which the executable work runs, or a compiler use
produce the work, or an object code interpreter used to run i	produce the work, or an object code interpreter used to run i

  The "Corresponding Source" for a work in object code form m	  The "Corresponding Source" for a work in object code form m
the source code needed to generate, install, and (for an exec	the source code needed to generate, install, and (for an exec
work) run the object code and to modify the work, including s	work) run the object code and to modify the work, including s
control those activities.  However, it does not include the w	control those activities.  However, it does not include the w
System Libraries, or general-purpose tools or generally avail	System Libraries, or general-purpose tools or generally avail
programs which are used unmodified in performing those activi	programs which are used unmodified in performing those activi
which are not part of the work.  For example, Corresponding S	which are not part of the work.  For example, Corresponding S
includes interface definition files associated with source fi	includes interface definition files associated with source fi
the work, and the source code for shared libraries and dynami	the work, and the source code for shared libraries and dynami
linked subprograms that the work is specifically designed to 	linked subprograms that the work is specifically designed to 
such as by intimate data communication or control flow betwee	such as by intimate data communication or control flow betwee
subprograms and other parts of the work.			subprograms and other parts of the work.

  The Corresponding Source need not include anything that use	  The Corresponding Source need not include anything that use
can regenerate automatically from other parts of the Correspo	can regenerate automatically from other parts of the Correspo
Source.								Source.

  The Corresponding Source for a work in source code form is 	  The Corresponding Source for a work in source code form is 
same work.							same work.

  2. Basic Permissions.						  2. Basic Permissions.

  All rights granted under this License are granted for the t	  All rights granted under this License are granted for the t
copyright on the Program, and are irrevocable provided the st	copyright on the Program, and are irrevocable provided the st
conditions are met.  This License explicitly affirms your unl	conditions are met.  This License explicitly affirms your unl
permission to run the unmodified Program.  The output from ru	permission to run the unmodified Program.  The output from ru
covered work is covered by this License only if the output, g	covered work is covered by this License only if the output, g
content, constitutes a covered work.  This License acknowledg	content, constitutes a covered work.  This License acknowledg
rights of fair use or other equivalent, as provided by copyri	rights of fair use or other equivalent, as provided by copyri

  You may make, run and propagate covered works that you do n	  You may make, run and propagate covered works that you do n
convey, without conditions so long as your license otherwise 	convey, without conditions so long as your license otherwise 
in force.  You may convey covered works to others for the sol	in force.  You may convey covered works to others for the sol
of having them make modifications exclusively for you, or pro	of having them make modifications exclusively for you, or pro
with facilities for running those works, provided that you co	with facilities for running those works, provided that you co
the terms of this License in conveying all material for which	the terms of this License in conveying all material for which
not control copyright.  Those thus making or running the cove	not control copyright.  Those thus making or running the cove
for you must do so exclusively on your behalf, under your dir	for you must do so exclusively on your behalf, under your dir
and control, on terms that prohibit them from making any copi	and control, on terms that prohibit them from making any copi
your copyrighted material outside their relationship with you	your copyrighted material outside their relationship with you

  Conveying under any other circumstances is permitted solely	  Conveying under any other circumstances is permitted solely
the conditions stated below.  Sublicensing is not allowed; se	the conditions stated below.  Sublicensing is not allowed; se
makes it unnecessary.						makes it unnecessary.

  3. Protecting Users' Legal Rights From Anti-Circumvention L	  3. Protecting Users' Legal Rights From Anti-Circumvention L

  No covered work shall be deemed part of an effective techno	  No covered work shall be deemed part of an effective techno
measure under any applicable law fulfilling obligations under	measure under any applicable law fulfilling obligations under
11 of the WIPO copyright treaty adopted on 20 December 1996, 	11 of the WIPO copyright treaty adopted on 20 December 1996, 
similar laws prohibiting or restricting circumvention of such	similar laws prohibiting or restricting circumvention of such
measures.							measures.

  When you convey a covered work, you waive any legal power t	  When you convey a covered work, you waive any legal power t
circumvention of technological measures to the extent such ci	circumvention of technological measures to the extent such ci
is effected by exercising rights under this License with resp	is effected by exercising rights under this License with resp
the covered work, and you disclaim any intention to limit ope	the covered work, and you disclaim any intention to limit ope
modification of the work as a means of enforcing, against the	modification of the work as a means of enforcing, against the
users, your or third parties' legal rights to forbid circumve	users, your or third parties' legal rights to forbid circumve
technological measures.						technological measures.

  4. Conveying Verbatim Copies.					  4. Conveying Verbatim Copies.

  You may convey verbatim copies of the Program's source code	  You may convey verbatim copies of the Program's source code
receive it, in any medium, provided that you conspicuously an	receive it, in any medium, provided that you conspicuously an
appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate copyright n	appropriately publish on each copy an appropriate copyright n
keep intact all notices stating that this License and any	keep intact all notices stating that this License and any
non-permissive terms added in accord with section 7 apply to 	non-permissive terms added in accord with section 7 apply to 
keep intact all notices of the absence of any warranty; and g	keep intact all notices of the absence of any warranty; and g
recipients a copy of this License along with the Program.	recipients a copy of this License along with the Program.

  You may charge any price or no price for each copy that you	  You may charge any price or no price for each copy that you
and you may offer support or warranty protection for a fee.	and you may offer support or warranty protection for a fee.

  5. Conveying Modified Source Versions.			  5. Conveying Modified Source Versions.

  You may convey a work based on the Program, or the modifica	  You may convey a work based on the Program, or the modifica
produce it from the Program, in the form of source code under	produce it from the Program, in the form of source code under
terms of section 4, provided that you also meet all of these 	terms of section 4, provided that you also meet all of these 

    a) The work must carry prominent notices stating that you	    a) The work must carry prominent notices stating that you
    it, and giving a relevant date.				    it, and giving a relevant date.

    b) The work must carry prominent notices stating that it 	    b) The work must carry prominent notices stating that it 
    released under this License and any conditions added unde	    released under this License and any conditions added unde
    7.  This requirement modifies the requirement in section 	    7.  This requirement modifies the requirement in section 
    "keep intact all notices".					    "keep intact all notices".

    c) You must license the entire work, as a whole, under th	    c) You must license the entire work, as a whole, under th
    License to anyone who comes into possession of a copy.  T	    License to anyone who comes into possession of a copy.  T
    License will therefore apply, along with any applicable s	    License will therefore apply, along with any applicable s
    additional terms, to the whole of the work, and all its p	    additional terms, to the whole of the work, and all its p
    regardless of how they are packaged.  This License gives 	    regardless of how they are packaged.  This License gives 
    permission to license the work in any other way, but it d	    permission to license the work in any other way, but it d
    invalidate such permission if you have separately receive	    invalidate such permission if you have separately receive

    d) If the work has interactive user interfaces, each must	    d) If the work has interactive user interfaces, each must
    Appropriate Legal Notices; however, if the Program has in	    Appropriate Legal Notices; however, if the Program has in
    interfaces that do not display Appropriate Legal Notices,	    interfaces that do not display Appropriate Legal Notices,
    work need not make them do so.				    work need not make them do so.

  A compilation of a covered work with other separate and ind	  A compilation of a covered work with other separate and ind
works, which are not by their nature extensions of the covere	works, which are not by their nature extensions of the covere
and which are not combined with it such as to form a larger p	and which are not combined with it such as to form a larger p
in or on a volume of a storage or distribution medium, is cal	in or on a volume of a storage or distribution medium, is cal
"aggregate" if the compilation and its resulting copyright ar	"aggregate" if the compilation and its resulting copyright ar
used to limit the access or legal rights of the compilation's	used to limit the access or legal rights of the compilation's
beyond what the individual works permit.  Inclusion of a cove	beyond what the individual works permit.  Inclusion of a cove
in an aggregate does not cause this License to apply to the o	in an aggregate does not cause this License to apply to the o
parts of the aggregate.						parts of the aggregate.

  6. Conveying Non-Source Forms.				  6. Conveying Non-Source Forms.

  You may convey a covered work in object code form under the	  You may convey a covered work in object code form under the
of sections 4 and 5, provided that you also convey the		of sections 4 and 5, provided that you also convey the
machine-readable Corresponding Source under the terms of this	machine-readable Corresponding Source under the terms of this
in one of these ways:						in one of these ways:

    a) Convey the object code in, or embodied in, a physical 	    a) Convey the object code in, or embodied in, a physical 
    (including a physical distribution medium), accompanied b	    (including a physical distribution medium), accompanied b
    Corresponding Source fixed on a durable physical medium	    Corresponding Source fixed on a durable physical medium
    customarily used for software interchange.			    customarily used for software interchange.

    b) Convey the object code in, or embodied in, a physical 	    b) Convey the object code in, or embodied in, a physical 
    (including a physical distribution medium), accompanied b	    (including a physical distribution medium), accompanied b
    written offer, valid for at least three years and valid f	    written offer, valid for at least three years and valid f
    long as you offer spare parts or customer support for tha	    long as you offer spare parts or customer support for tha
    model, to give anyone who possesses the object code eithe	    model, to give anyone who possesses the object code eithe
    copy of the Corresponding Source for all the software in 	    copy of the Corresponding Source for all the software in 
    product that is covered by this License, on a durable phy	    product that is covered by this License, on a durable phy
    medium customarily used for software interchange, for a p	    medium customarily used for software interchange, for a p
    more than your reasonable cost of physically performing t	    more than your reasonable cost of physically performing t
    conveying of source, or (2) access to copy the		    conveying of source, or (2) access to copy the
    Corresponding Source from a network server at no charge.	    Corresponding Source from a network server at no charge.

    c) Convey individual copies of the object code with a cop	    c) Convey individual copies of the object code with a cop
    written offer to provide the Corresponding Source.  This	    written offer to provide the Corresponding Source.  This
    alternative is allowed only occasionally and noncommercia	    alternative is allowed only occasionally and noncommercia
    only if you received the object code with such an offer, 	    only if you received the object code with such an offer, 
    with subsection 6b.						    with subsection 6b.

    d) Convey the object code by offering access from a desig	    d) Convey the object code by offering access from a desig
    place (gratis or for a charge), and offer equivalent acce	    place (gratis or for a charge), and offer equivalent acce
    Corresponding Source in the same way through the same pla	    Corresponding Source in the same way through the same pla
    further charge.  You need not require recipients to copy 	    further charge.  You need not require recipients to copy 
    Corresponding Source along with the object code.  If the 	    Corresponding Source along with the object code.  If the 
    copy the object code is a network server, the Correspondi	    copy the object code is a network server, the Correspondi
    may be on a different server (operated by you or a third 	    may be on a different server (operated by you or a third 
    that supports equivalent copying facilities, provided you	    that supports equivalent copying facilities, provided you
    clear directions next to the object code saying where to 	    clear directions next to the object code saying where to 
    Corresponding Source.  Regardless of what server hosts th	    Corresponding Source.  Regardless of what server hosts th
    Corresponding Source, you remain obligated to ensure that	    Corresponding Source, you remain obligated to ensure that
    available for as long as needed to satisfy these requirem	    available for as long as needed to satisfy these requirem

    e) Convey the object code using peer-to-peer transmission	    e) Convey the object code using peer-to-peer transmission
    you inform other peers where the object code and Correspo	    you inform other peers where the object code and Correspo
    Source of the work are being offered to the general publi	    Source of the work are being offered to the general publi
    charge under subsection 6d.					    charge under subsection 6d.

  A separable portion of the object code, whose source code i	  A separable portion of the object code, whose source code i
from the Corresponding Source as a System Library, need not b	from the Corresponding Source as a System Library, need not b
included in conveying the object code work.			included in conveying the object code work.

  A "User Product" is either (1) a "consumer product", which 	  A "User Product" is either (1) a "consumer product", which 
tangible personal property which is normally used for persona	tangible personal property which is normally used for persona
or household purposes, or (2) anything designed or sold for i	or household purposes, or (2) anything designed or sold for i
into a dwelling.  In determining whether a product is a consu	into a dwelling.  In determining whether a product is a consu
doubtful cases shall be resolved in favor of coverage.  For a	doubtful cases shall be resolved in favor of coverage.  For a
product received by a particular user, "normally used" refers	product received by a particular user, "normally used" refers
typical or common use of that class of product, regardless of	typical or common use of that class of product, regardless of
of the particular user or of the way in which the particular 	of the particular user or of the way in which the particular 
actually uses, or expects or is expected to use, the product.	actually uses, or expects or is expected to use, the product.
is a consumer product regardless of whether the product has s	is a consumer product regardless of whether the product has s
commercial, industrial or non-consumer uses, unless such uses	commercial, industrial or non-consumer uses, unless such uses
the only significant mode of use of the product.		the only significant mode of use of the product.

  "Installation Information" for a User Product means any met	  "Installation Information" for a User Product means any met
procedures, authorization keys, or other information required	procedures, authorization keys, or other information required
and execute modified versions of a covered work in that User 	and execute modified versions of a covered work in that User 
a modified version of its Corresponding Source.  The informat	a modified version of its Corresponding Source.  The informat
suffice to ensure that the continued functioning of the modif	suffice to ensure that the continued functioning of the modif
code is in no case prevented or interfered with solely becaus	code is in no case prevented or interfered with solely becaus
modification has been made.					modification has been made.

  If you convey an object code work under this section in, or	  If you convey an object code work under this section in, or
specifically for use in, a User Product, and the conveying oc	specifically for use in, a User Product, and the conveying oc
part of a transaction in which the right of possession and us	part of a transaction in which the right of possession and us
User Product is transferred to the recipient in perpetuity or	User Product is transferred to the recipient in perpetuity or
fixed term (regardless of how the transaction is characterize	fixed term (regardless of how the transaction is characterize
Corresponding Source conveyed under this section must be acco	Corresponding Source conveyed under this section must be acco
by the Installation Information.  But this requirement does n	by the Installation Information.  But this requirement does n
if neither you nor any third party retains the ability to ins	if neither you nor any third party retains the ability to ins
modified object code on the User Product (for example, the wo	modified object code on the User Product (for example, the wo
been installed in ROM).						been installed in ROM).

  The requirement to provide Installation Information does no	  The requirement to provide Installation Information does no
requirement to continue to provide support service, warranty,	requirement to continue to provide support service, warranty,
for a work that has been modified or installed by the recipie	for a work that has been modified or installed by the recipie
the User Product in which it has been modified or installed. 	the User Product in which it has been modified or installed. 
network may be denied when the modification itself materially	network may be denied when the modification itself materially
adversely affects the operation of the network or violates th	adversely affects the operation of the network or violates th
protocols for communication across the network.			protocols for communication across the network.

  Corresponding Source conveyed, and Installation Information	  Corresponding Source conveyed, and Installation Information
in accord with this section must be in a format that is publi	in accord with this section must be in a format that is publi
documented (and with an implementation available to the publi	documented (and with an implementation available to the publi
source code form), and must require no special password or ke	source code form), and must require no special password or ke
unpacking, reading or copying.					unpacking, reading or copying.

  7. Additional Terms.						  7. Additional Terms.

  "Additional permissions" are terms that supplement the term	  "Additional permissions" are terms that supplement the term
License by making exceptions from one or more of its conditio	License by making exceptions from one or more of its conditio
Additional permissions that are applicable to the entire Prog	Additional permissions that are applicable to the entire Prog
be treated as though they were included in this License, to t	be treated as though they were included in this License, to t
that they are valid under applicable law.  If additional perm	that they are valid under applicable law.  If additional perm
apply only to part of the Program, that part may be used sepa	apply only to part of the Program, that part may be used sepa
under those permissions, but the entire Program remains gover	under those permissions, but the entire Program remains gover
this License without regard to the additional permissions.	this License without regard to the additional permissions.

  When you convey a copy of a covered work, you may at your o	  When you convey a copy of a covered work, you may at your o
remove any additional permissions from that copy, or from any	remove any additional permissions from that copy, or from any
it.  (Additional permissions may be written to require their 	it.  (Additional permissions may be written to require their 
removal in certain cases when you modify the work.)  You may 	removal in certain cases when you modify the work.)  You may 
additional permissions on material, added by you to a covered	additional permissions on material, added by you to a covered
for which you have or can give appropriate copyright permissi	for which you have or can give appropriate copyright permissi

  Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, for ma	  Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, for ma
add to a covered work, you may (if authorized by the copyrigh	add to a covered work, you may (if authorized by the copyrigh
that material) supplement the terms of this License with term	that material) supplement the terms of this License with term

    a) Disclaiming warranty or limiting liability differently	    a) Disclaiming warranty or limiting liability differently
    terms of sections 15 and 16 of this License; or		    terms of sections 15 and 16 of this License; or

    b) Requiring preservation of specified reasonable legal n	    b) Requiring preservation of specified reasonable legal n
    author attributions in that material or in the Appropriat	    author attributions in that material or in the Appropriat
    Notices displayed by works containing it; or		    Notices displayed by works containing it; or

    c) Prohibiting misrepresentation of the origin of that ma	    c) Prohibiting misrepresentation of the origin of that ma
    requiring that modified versions of such material be mark	    requiring that modified versions of such material be mark
    reasonable ways as different from the original version; o	    reasonable ways as different from the original version; o

    d) Limiting the use for publicity purposes of names of li	    d) Limiting the use for publicity purposes of names of li
    authors of the material; or					    authors of the material; or

    e) Declining to grant rights under trademark law for use 	    e) Declining to grant rights under trademark law for use 
    trade names, trademarks, or service marks; or		    trade names, trademarks, or service marks; or

    f) Requiring indemnification of licensors and authors of 	    f) Requiring indemnification of licensors and authors of 
    material by anyone who conveys the material (or modified 	    material by anyone who conveys the material (or modified 
    it) with contractual assumptions of liability to the reci	    it) with contractual assumptions of liability to the reci
    any liability that these contractual assumptions directly	    any liability that these contractual assumptions directly
    those licensors and authors.				    those licensors and authors.

  All other non-permissive additional terms are considered "f	  All other non-permissive additional terms are considered "f
restrictions" within the meaning of section 10.  If the Progr	restrictions" within the meaning of section 10.  If the Progr
received it, or any part of it, contains a notice stating tha	received it, or any part of it, contains a notice stating tha
governed by this License along with a term that is a further	governed by this License along with a term that is a further
restriction, you may remove that term.  If a license document	restriction, you may remove that term.  If a license document
a further restriction but permits relicensing or conveying un	a further restriction but permits relicensing or conveying un
License, you may add to a covered work material governed by t	License, you may add to a covered work material governed by t
of that license document, provided that the further restricti	of that license document, provided that the further restricti
not survive such relicensing or conveying.			not survive such relicensing or conveying.

  If you add terms to a covered work in accord with this sect	  If you add terms to a covered work in accord with this sect
must place, in the relevant source files, a statement of the	must place, in the relevant source files, a statement of the
additional terms that apply to those files, or a notice indic	additional terms that apply to those files, or a notice indic
where to find the applicable terms.				where to find the applicable terms.

  Additional terms, permissive or non-permissive, may be stat	  Additional terms, permissive or non-permissive, may be stat
form of a separately written license, or stated as exceptions	form of a separately written license, or stated as exceptions
the above requirements apply either way.			the above requirements apply either way.

  8. Termination.						  8. Termination.

  You may not propagate or modify a covered work except as ex	  You may not propagate or modify a covered work except as ex
provided under this License.  Any attempt otherwise to propag	provided under this License.  Any attempt otherwise to propag
modify it is void, and will automatically terminate your righ	modify it is void, and will automatically terminate your righ
this License (including any patent licenses granted under the	this License (including any patent licenses granted under the
paragraph of section 11).					paragraph of section 11).

  However, if you cease all violation of this License, then y	  However, if you cease all violation of this License, then y
license from a particular copyright holder is reinstated (a)	license from a particular copyright holder is reinstated (a)
provisionally, unless and until the copyright holder explicit	provisionally, unless and until the copyright holder explicit
finally terminates your license, and (b) permanently, if the 	finally terminates your license, and (b) permanently, if the 
holder fails to notify you of the violation by some reasonabl	holder fails to notify you of the violation by some reasonabl
prior to 60 days after the cessation.				prior to 60 days after the cessation.

  Moreover, your license from a particular copyright holder i	  Moreover, your license from a particular copyright holder i
reinstated permanently if the copyright holder notifies you o	reinstated permanently if the copyright holder notifies you o
violation by some reasonable means, this is the first time yo	violation by some reasonable means, this is the first time yo
received notice of violation of this License (for any work) f	received notice of violation of this License (for any work) f
copyright holder, and you cure the violation prior to 30 days	copyright holder, and you cure the violation prior to 30 days
your receipt of the notice.					your receipt of the notice.

  Termination of your rights under this section does not term	  Termination of your rights under this section does not term
licenses of parties who have received copies or rights from y	licenses of parties who have received copies or rights from y
this License.  If your rights have been terminated and not pe	this License.  If your rights have been terminated and not pe
reinstated, you do not qualify to receive new licenses for th	reinstated, you do not qualify to receive new licenses for th
material under section 10.					material under section 10.

  9. Acceptance Not Required for Having Copies.			  9. Acceptance Not Required for Having Copies.

  You are not required to accept this License in order to rec	  You are not required to accept this License in order to rec
run a copy of the Program.  Ancillary propagation of a covere	run a copy of the Program.  Ancillary propagation of a covere
occurring solely as a consequence of using peer-to-peer trans	occurring solely as a consequence of using peer-to-peer trans
to receive a copy likewise does not require acceptance.  Howe	to receive a copy likewise does not require acceptance.  Howe
nothing other than this License grants you permission to prop	nothing other than this License grants you permission to prop
modify any covered work.  These actions infringe copyright if	modify any covered work.  These actions infringe copyright if
not accept this License.  Therefore, by modifying or propagat	not accept this License.  Therefore, by modifying or propagat
covered work, you indicate your acceptance of this License to	covered work, you indicate your acceptance of this License to

  10. Automatic Licensing of Downstream Recipients.		  10. Automatic Licensing of Downstream Recipients.

  Each time you convey a covered work, the recipient automati	  Each time you convey a covered work, the recipient automati
receives a license from the original licensors, to run, modif	receives a license from the original licensors, to run, modif
propagate that work, subject to this License.  You are not re	propagate that work, subject to this License.  You are not re
for enforcing compliance by third parties with this License.	for enforcing compliance by third parties with this License.

  An "entity transaction" is a transaction transferring contr	  An "entity transaction" is a transaction transferring contr
organization, or substantially all assets of one, or subdivid	organization, or substantially all assets of one, or subdivid
organization, or merging organizations.  If propagation of a 	organization, or merging organizations.  If propagation of a 
work results from an entity transaction, each party to that	work results from an entity transaction, each party to that
transaction who receives a copy of the work also receives wha	transaction who receives a copy of the work also receives wha
licenses to the work the party's predecessor in interest had 	licenses to the work the party's predecessor in interest had 
give under the previous paragraph, plus a right to possession	give under the previous paragraph, plus a right to possession
Corresponding Source of the work from the predecessor in inte	Corresponding Source of the work from the predecessor in inte
the predecessor has it or can get it with reasonable efforts.	the predecessor has it or can get it with reasonable efforts.

  You may not impose any further restrictions on the exercise	  You may not impose any further restrictions on the exercise
rights granted or affirmed under this License.  For example, 	rights granted or affirmed under this License.  For example, 
not impose a license fee, royalty, or other charge for exerci	not impose a license fee, royalty, or other charge for exerci
rights granted under this License, and you may not initiate l	rights granted under this License, and you may not initiate l
(including a cross-claim or counterclaim in a lawsuit) allegi	(including a cross-claim or counterclaim in a lawsuit) allegi
any patent claim is infringed by making, using, selling, offe	any patent claim is infringed by making, using, selling, offe
sale, or importing the Program or any portion of it.		sale, or importing the Program or any portion of it.

  11. Patents.							  11. Patents.

  A "contributor" is a copyright holder who authorizes use un	  A "contributor" is a copyright holder who authorizes use un
License of the Program or a work on which the Program is base	License of the Program or a work on which the Program is base
work thus licensed is called the contributor's "contributor v	work thus licensed is called the contributor's "contributor v

  A contributor's "essential patent claims" are all patent cl	  A contributor's "essential patent claims" are all patent cl
owned or controlled by the contributor, whether already acqui	owned or controlled by the contributor, whether already acqui
hereafter acquired, that would be infringed by some manner, p	hereafter acquired, that would be infringed by some manner, p
by this License, of making, using, or selling its contributor	by this License, of making, using, or selling its contributor
but do not include claims that would be infringed only as a	but do not include claims that would be infringed only as a
consequence of further modification of the contributor versio	consequence of further modification of the contributor versio
purposes of this definition, "control" includes the right to 	purposes of this definition, "control" includes the right to 
patent sublicenses in a manner consistent with the requiremen	patent sublicenses in a manner consistent with the requiremen
this License.							this License.

  Each contributor grants you a non-exclusive, worldwide, roy	  Each contributor grants you a non-exclusive, worldwide, roy
patent license under the contributor's essential patent claim	patent license under the contributor's essential patent claim
make, use, sell, offer for sale, import and otherwise run, mo	make, use, sell, offer for sale, import and otherwise run, mo
propagate the contents of its contributor version.		propagate the contents of its contributor version.

  In the following three paragraphs, a "patent license" is an	  In the following three paragraphs, a "patent license" is an
agreement or commitment, however denominated, not to enforce 	agreement or commitment, however denominated, not to enforce 
(such as an express permission to practice a patent or covena	(such as an express permission to practice a patent or covena
sue for patent infringement).  To "grant" such a patent licen	sue for patent infringement).  To "grant" such a patent licen
party means to make such an agreement or commitment not to en	party means to make such an agreement or commitment not to en
patent against the party.					patent against the party.

  If you convey a covered work, knowingly relying on a patent	  If you convey a covered work, knowingly relying on a patent
and the Corresponding Source of the work is not available for	and the Corresponding Source of the work is not available for
to copy, free of charge and under the terms of this License, 	to copy, free of charge and under the terms of this License, 
publicly available network server or other readily accessible	publicly available network server or other readily accessible
then you must either (1) cause the Corresponding Source to be	then you must either (1) cause the Corresponding Source to be
available, or (2) arrange to deprive yourself of the benefit 	available, or (2) arrange to deprive yourself of the benefit 
patent license for this particular work, or (3) arrange, in a	patent license for this particular work, or (3) arrange, in a
consistent with the requirements of this License, to extend t	consistent with the requirements of this License, to extend t
license to downstream recipients.  "Knowingly relying" means 	license to downstream recipients.  "Knowingly relying" means 
actual knowledge that, but for the patent license, your conve	actual knowledge that, but for the patent license, your conve
covered work in a country, or your recipient's use of the cov	covered work in a country, or your recipient's use of the cov
in a country, would infringe one or more identifiable patents	in a country, would infringe one or more identifiable patents
country that you have reason to believe are valid.		country that you have reason to believe are valid.

  If, pursuant to or in connection with a single transaction 	  If, pursuant to or in connection with a single transaction 
arrangement, you convey, or propagate by procuring conveyance	arrangement, you convey, or propagate by procuring conveyance
covered work, and grant a patent license to some of the parti	covered work, and grant a patent license to some of the parti
receiving the covered work authorizing them to use, propagate	receiving the covered work authorizing them to use, propagate
or convey a specific copy of the covered work, then the paten	or convey a specific copy of the covered work, then the paten
you grant is automatically extended to all recipients of the 	you grant is automatically extended to all recipients of the 
work and works based on it.					work and works based on it.

  A patent license is "discriminatory" if it does not include	  A patent license is "discriminatory" if it does not include
the scope of its coverage, prohibits the exercise of, or is	the scope of its coverage, prohibits the exercise of, or is
conditioned on the non-exercise of one or more of the rights 	conditioned on the non-exercise of one or more of the rights 
specifically granted under this License.  You may not convey 	specifically granted under this License.  You may not convey 
work if you are a party to an arrangement with a third party 	work if you are a party to an arrangement with a third party 
in the business of distributing software, under which you mak	in the business of distributing software, under which you mak
to the third party based on the extent of your activity of co	to the third party based on the extent of your activity of co
the work, and under which the third party grants, to any of t	the work, and under which the third party grants, to any of t
parties who would receive the covered work from you, a discri	parties who would receive the covered work from you, a discri
patent license (a) in connection with copies of the covered w	patent license (a) in connection with copies of the covered w
conveyed by you (or copies made from those copies), or (b) pr	conveyed by you (or copies made from those copies), or (b) pr
for and in connection with specific products or compilations 	for and in connection with specific products or compilations 
contain the covered work, unless you entered into that arrang	contain the covered work, unless you entered into that arrang
or that patent license was granted, prior to 28 March 2007.	or that patent license was granted, prior to 28 March 2007.

  Nothing in this License shall be construed as excluding or 	  Nothing in this License shall be construed as excluding or 
any implied license or other defenses to infringement that ma	any implied license or other defenses to infringement that ma
otherwise be available to you under applicable patent law.	otherwise be available to you under applicable patent law.

  12. No Surrender of Others' Freedom.				  12. No Surrender of Others' Freedom.

  If conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, a	  If conditions are imposed on you (whether by court order, a
otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, th	otherwise) that contradict the conditions of this License, th
excuse you from the conditions of this License.  If you canno	excuse you from the conditions of this License.  If you canno
covered work so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations	covered work so as to satisfy simultaneously your obligations
License and any other pertinent obligations, then as a conseq	License and any other pertinent obligations, then as a conseq
not convey it at all.  For example, if you agree to terms tha	not convey it at all.  For example, if you agree to terms tha
to collect a royalty for further conveying from those to whom	to collect a royalty for further conveying from those to whom
the Program, the only way you could satisfy both those terms 	the Program, the only way you could satisfy both those terms 
License would be to refrain entirely from conveying the Progr	License would be to refrain entirely from conveying the Progr

  13. Remote Network Interaction; Use with the GNU General Pu |	  13. Use with the GNU Affero General Public License.
							      <
  Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, if you <
Program, your modified version must prominently offer all use <
interacting with it remotely through a computer network (if y <
supports such interaction) an opportunity to receive the Corr <
Source of your version by providing access to the Correspondi <
from a network server at no charge, through some standard or  <
means of facilitating copying of software.  This Correspondin <
shall include the Corresponding Source for any work covered b <
of the GNU General Public License that is incorporated pursua <
following paragraph.					      <

  Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, you ha	  Notwithstanding any other provision of this License, you ha
permission to link or combine any covered work with a work li	permission to link or combine any covered work with a work li
under version 3 of the GNU General Public License into a sing |	under version 3 of the GNU Affero General Public License into
combined work, and to convey the resulting work.  The terms o	combined work, and to convey the resulting work.  The terms o
License will continue to apply to the part which is the cover	License will continue to apply to the part which is the cover
but the work with which it is combined will remain governed b |	but the special requirements of the GNU Affero General Public
3 of the GNU General Public License.			      |	section 13, concerning interaction through a network will app
							      >	combination as such.

  14. Revised Versions of this License.				  14. Revised Versions of this License.

  The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new	  The Free Software Foundation may publish revised and/or new
the GNU Affero General Public License from time to time.  Suc |	the GNU General Public License from time to time.  Such new v
will be similar in spirit to the present version, but may dif |	be similar in spirit to the present version, but may differ i
address new problems or concerns.				address new problems or concerns.

  Each version is given a distinguishing version number.  If 	  Each version is given a distinguishing version number.  If 
Program specifies that a certain numbered version of the GNU  |	Program specifies that a certain numbered version of the GNU 
Public License "or any later version" applies to it, you have	Public License "or any later version" applies to it, you have
option of following the terms and conditions either of that n	option of following the terms and conditions either of that n
version or of any later version published by the Free Softwar	version or of any later version published by the Free Softwar
Foundation.  If the Program does not specify a version number	Foundation.  If the Program does not specify a version number
GNU Affero General Public License, you may choose any version |	GNU General Public License, you may choose any version ever p
by the Free Software Foundation.				by the Free Software Foundation.

  If the Program specifies that a proxy can decide which futu	  If the Program specifies that a proxy can decide which futu
versions of the GNU Affero General Public License can be used |	versions of the GNU General Public License can be used, that 
public statement of acceptance of a version permanently autho	public statement of acceptance of a version permanently autho
to choose that version for the Program.				to choose that version for the Program.

  Later license versions may give you additional or different	  Later license versions may give you additional or different
permissions.  However, no additional obligations are imposed 	permissions.  However, no additional obligations are imposed 
author or copyright holder as a result of your choosing to fo	author or copyright holder as a result of your choosing to fo
later version.							later version.

  15. Disclaimer of Warranty.					  15. Disclaimer of Warranty.

  THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITT	  THERE IS NO WARRANTY FOR THE PROGRAM, TO THE EXTENT PERMITT
APPLICABLE LAW.  EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE 	APPLICABLE LAW.  EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING THE 
HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE PROGRAM "AS IS" WITH	HOLDERS AND/OR OTHER PARTIES PROVIDE THE PROGRAM "AS IS" WITH
OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT 	OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT 
THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A P	THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A P
PURPOSE.  THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE O	PURPOSE.  THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE O
IS WITH YOU.  SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME 	IS WITH YOU.  SHOULD THE PROGRAM PROVE DEFECTIVE, YOU ASSUME 
ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.			ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.

  16. Limitation of Liability.					  16. Limitation of Liability.

  IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO 	  IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW OR AGREED TO 
WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MODIFIES AN	WILL ANY COPYRIGHT HOLDER, OR ANY OTHER PARTY WHO MODIFIES AN
THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES,	THE PROGRAM AS PERMITTED ABOVE, BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR DAMAGES,
GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING	GENERAL, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING
USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITE	USE OR INABILITY TO USE THE PROGRAM (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITE
DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY	DATA OR DATA BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY
PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER	PARTIES OR A FAILURE OF THE PROGRAM TO OPERATE WITH ANY OTHER
EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE PO	EVEN IF SUCH HOLDER OR OTHER PARTY HAS BEEN ADVISED OF THE PO
SUCH DAMAGES.							SUCH DAMAGES.

  17. Interpretation of Sections 15 and 16.			  17. Interpretation of Sections 15 and 16.

  If the disclaimer of warranty and limitation of liability p	  If the disclaimer of warranty and limitation of liability p
above cannot be given local legal effect according to their t	above cannot be given local legal effect according to their t
reviewing courts shall apply local law that most closely appr	reviewing courts shall apply local law that most closely appr
an absolute waiver of all civil liability in connection with 	an absolute waiver of all civil liability in connection with 
Program, unless a warranty or assumption of liability accompa	Program, unless a warranty or assumption of liability accompa
copy of the Program in return for a fee.			copy of the Program in return for a fee.

                     END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS		                     END OF TERMS AND CONDITIONS

            How to Apply These Terms to Your New Programs	            How to Apply These Terms to Your New Programs

  If you develop a new program, and you want it to be of the 	  If you develop a new program, and you want it to be of the 
possible use to the public, the best way to achieve this is t	possible use to the public, the best way to achieve this is t
free software which everyone can redistribute and change unde	free software which everyone can redistribute and change unde

  To do so, attach the following notices to the program.  It 	  To do so, attach the following notices to the program.  It 
to attach them to the start of each source file to most effec	to attach them to the start of each source file to most effec
state the exclusion of warranty; and each file should have at	state the exclusion of warranty; and each file should have at
the "copyright" line and a pointer to where the full notice i	the "copyright" line and a pointer to where the full notice i

    <one line to give the program's name and a brief idea of 	    <one line to give the program's name and a brief idea of 
    Copyright (C) <year>  <name of author>			    Copyright (C) <year>  <name of author>

    This program is free software: you can redistribute it an	    This program is free software: you can redistribute it an
    it under the terms of the GNU Affero General Public Licen |	    it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as p
    the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the Lic	    the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the Lic
    (at your option) any later version.				    (at your option) any later version.

    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be u	    This program is distributed in the hope that it will be u
    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warran	    but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warran
    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See	    MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See
    GNU Affero General Public License for more details.	      |	    GNU General Public License for more details.

    You should have received a copy of the GNU Affero General |	    You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public
    along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.or	    along with this program.  If not, see <https://www.gnu.or

Also add information on how to contact you by electronic and 	Also add information on how to contact you by electronic and 

  If your software can interact with users remotely through a |	  If the program does terminal interaction, make it output a 
network, you should also make sure that it provides a way for |	notice like this when it starts in an interactive mode:
get its source.  For example, if your program is a web applic |
interface could display a "Source" link that leads users to a |	    <program>  Copyright (C) <year>  <name of author>
of the code.  There are many ways you could offer source, and |	    This program comes with ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY; for detai
solutions will be better for different programs; see section  |	    This is free software, and you are welcome to redistribut
specific requirements.					      |	    under certain conditions; type `show c' for details.
							      >
							      >	The hypothetical commands `show w' and `show c' should show t
							      >	parts of the General Public License.  Of course, your program
							      >	might be different; for a GUI interface, you would use an "ab

  You should also get your employer (if you work as a program	  You should also get your employer (if you work as a program
if any, to sign a "copyright disclaimer" for the program, if 	if any, to sign a "copyright disclaimer" for the program, if 
For more information on this, and how to apply and follow the |	For more information on this, and how to apply and follow the
<https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.				<https://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
							      >
							      >	  The GNU General Public License does not permit incorporatin
							      >	into proprietary programs.  If your program is a subroutine l
							      >	may consider it more useful to permit linking proprietary app
							      >	the library.  If this is what you want to do, use the GNU Les
							      >	Public License instead of this License.  But first, please re
							      >	<https://www.gnu.org/licenses/why-not-lgpl.html>.
